PC screening in men with hypogonadism
Even if screening of the general population is not widely implemented, PSA is commonly clinically used as a marker in the diagnosis of PC [ 129 ]. Although the exact relationship between testosterone and PC is unclear, the production of PSA is under testosterone influence and untreated patients with hypogonadism have generally lower PSA compared to eugonadal men [ 130 ]. Furthermore, a low PSA has been suggested as a marker for hypogonadism [ 131 ,  132 ]. Consequently, when using PSA as a screening tool for PC in untreated hypogonadal men, the PSA cut off value for further investigations should probably be held at a lower level since the number of detected PC was high in a group hypogonadal men with PSA below 4 ng/ml [ 133 ]. In hypogonadal men on TRT, it was shown that PSA levels after an initial increase remain stable after normalization of testosterone for 5 years, and, in addition, PC could be effectively diagnosed and treated in men taking TRT using the standard cut-off levels [ 134 ]. Due to continuing uncertainties regarding risks/benefits of PC screening, men with LOH on TRT should be offered the option of prostate safety monitoring before and during treatment [ 135 ] including digital rectal examination (DRE) and PSA, using the same cut-off values as eugonadal men for extended investigations. Taken together, men on TRT can be screened with PSA in a similar way as the general male population.
Population based screening for PC based on PSA testing is currently not recommended [ 122 ]. The outcome of two major randomized trials, including the European Randomised Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) [ 123 ,  124 ] and Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovary screening study (PLCO) [ 125 ] are not supportive for population screening using PSA, despite evidence of a reduction in PC-specific mortality. The inability of the PSA test to discriminate between clinically significant cancer and indolent cancers is a major limitation with PSA based screening. The harms of unnecessary prostate biopsies resulting in overdiagnosis and over treatment of indolent cancers outweigh any benefits of potential mortality reduction. Today, most guidelines recommend informing men over 50 years of age about pros and cons with PSA testing, so they can make informed decisions based on their individual situation, while risk-adapted strategies often are applied for men confirmed to be of higher risk due to genetic profiles or family history. Recent developments of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-fusion technologies for prostate imaging, which can classify men with elevated PSA into different risk categories, leading to biopsies only on men with risk for clinically significant cancer, appears as a promising concept for future screening strategies. This concept is presently tested in prospective clinical trials [ 126 ,  127 ] and recently it was shown that a PSA-based blood test (Stockholm3) combined with MRI- targeted biopsy decreased over detection while maintaining the ability to detect clinically significant PC in a prospective randomized screening trial [ 128 ].
