4.1.
Pathophysiology of Eating Disorders
Food intake or eating is the process by which edible substances are consumed in order to balance the energy expenditure in living creatures. This process relies in physiologic mechanisms regulating appetite and the natural drive to eat. In some conditions human feeding behavior is altered leading to diseases, collectively known as eating disorders. These are a group of disorders characterized by physiological and psychological disturbances in appetite or food intake. They can be divided into three main pathologies,  i.e. , binge-eating, Bulimia Nervosa (BN) and Anorexia Nervosa (AN). Binge-Eating Disorder (BED) is associated with three or more of the following: eating until feeling uncomfortably full; eating large amounts of food when not physically hungry; eating much more rapidly than normal; eating alone due to embarrassment; feeling of disgust, depression, or guilt after overeating. Criteria includes occurrence on average, at least 2 days a week for 6 months. The binge eating is not associated with compensatory behavior ( i.e. , purging, excessive exercise,  etc .) and does not co-occur exclusively with BN or AN (from DSM-IV, 1994) [ 194 ]. BN is characterized by a cycle of binge eating followed by purging to avert weight gain. Purging methods often include self-induced vomiting, use of laxatives or diuretics, excessive exercise, and fasting. AN is characterized by the loss of appetite and is associated with other features including an excessive fear of becoming overweight, body image disturbances, significant weight loss, refusal to maintain minimal normal weight, excessive exercise and amenorrhea [ 195 ]. Indeed, AN is classified into two subtypes depending on the presence (AN-BP) or absence (AN-R) of binge-purge behavior and BN is similarly classified into two subtypes depending on the presence (BN-P) or absence (BN-NP) of habitual purging.
In this review we will address the role of the endocannabinoid system (ECS) in eating disorders. We will not include obesity in this review because indeed it is not formally considered an eating disorder. However, we would like to underline the increasing evidence dealing with specific changes in the central nervous system of obese people, including those occurring in brain areas involved in the rewarding aspects of food (reviewed in [ 196 ]). Likewise, and maybe reflecting direct central consequences of obesity, it is noteworthy the high incidence of anxiety and depression (also present in classical eating disorders) in obese people, affecting around 50% of this population. Also deserving greater consideration are the striking similarities in the pathophysiologic sequelae occurring with obesity and addiction, also suggesting for a re-evaluation of how these diseases are classified [ 196 ].
Eating disorders can be chronic and disabling conditions characterized by aberrant patterns of feeding behavior and weight regulation, including abnormal attitudes and perceptions toward body weight and shape [ 197 ]. Indeed, AN has the highest mortality rate among psychiatric diseases [ 198 ]. The etiologies of these diseases are at present poorly understood, but both AN and BN occur most frequently in adolescent females. This increased incidence and prevalence may very well be a direct reflection of cultural pressures for thinness [ 199 ]. However, the discrete occurrence and heritability suggest there are some biological vulnerabilities involved in these diseases [ 197 ]. In fact, twin studies on AN and BN suggest there is a 50–80% genetic contribution to these diseases [ 200 , 201 ]. However, there is little knowledge about the connection between psychological symptoms and the neuropathophysiology associated with these diseases and on how such genetic vulnerabilities impact on brain pathways and what systems are primarily involved. Because of the psychiatric nature of these diseases, the monoamine systems ( i.e. , the serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine pathways) have been explored in greater detail. Among these, the serotoninergic system maybe the more adversely affected and its deregulation is present in AN patients. However, the response to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors is variable among patients suffering different subtypes of the illness, and the efficacy of such medication has been also questioned due to the common occurrence of relapse [ 202 , 203 ].
Current research on eating disorders also points to a deregulation of neuronal circuits involved in food intake, including those related to emotional and reward pathways linked to feeding behavior [ 204 ]. In fact, not only neurotransmitters but also neuropeptides and peripheral peptides have been reported to be deregulated in eating disorders patients [reviewed in 205]. Although the abnormal peptide levels could actually be secondary to eating disorders appearance, it has been hypothesized that they could participate in the maintenance and outcome of the disease [ 205 ]. Of particular interest for this review, given the tight connection with the ECS, is the deranged leptin signaling system that has been found in AN and BN patients [ 206 , 207 ]. It has been hypothesized that the reward systems could be compromised leading to food intake-related dysphoria that would promote a vicious cycle of decreasing eating in order to avoid the dysphoric consequences of food consumption [ 197 ]. Alternatively or additionally, the rewarding aspects of the aberrant eating behaviors might be abnormally increased, mediating in part the patient's addiction to self-starvation [ 205 ]. Thus, AN and BN could be considered as dependency syndromes. In this context, the reward system (see Section 3.2) could have an important role since it integrates “liking” (pleasure/palatability) and “wanting” (appetite/incentive motivation) perceptions associated with food.
4.2.
The Endocannabinoid System in Eating Disorders
The widespread role of the ECS in regulating energy balance (see Section 3.1) has spawned investigations into putative defects in endocannabinoid signaling that may underlie eating disorders. Paradoxically, to the best of our knowledge, there are no animal studies investigating alterations in the ECS in eating disorders, maybe as a consequence of the scarce number of reliable animal models mimicking these diseases. Only a couple of recent studies in the activity-based anorexia paradigm have been performed, and they are focused on the potential therapeutic value of cannabinoids (see next section). Increased blood levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide have been found in both AN and binge-eating disorder (BED) patients, but not in BN patients [ 208 ]. Indeed, anandamide levels were significantly and inversely correlated with plasma leptin concentrations in both healthy controls and anorexic women. Interestingly, there is evidence to suggest that hypoleptinemia in AN patients may be an important factor underlying the excessive physical activity [ 207 ], one of the hallmarks in AN. Thus, these results suggest that alterations in the ECS associated with deregulated leptin signaling could be involved in the pathophysiology of AN. It is well-known that the ECS and leptin interact functionally at the molecular level (reviewed in [ 118 ]), and thus it is easy to draw a theoretical frame in support of the important role played by both systems in AN and the therapeutic potential of leptin and cannabinoids in this disease [ 204 ]. Furthermore, elevated levels of CB1 but not CB2 mRNA have been found in the blood of females with AN and BN, further supporting the hypothesis of deregulated endocannabinoid signaling in eating disorders [ 209 ]. Paradoxically, these authors found an association between lower CB1 expression and more severe forms of the disorders.
Anandamide belongs to the lipid family of acylethanolamides. Another member of this group of lipids, named oleoylethanolamide, has also an important role on energy balance by promoting satiety and lipolysis through the activation of PPAR-α [ 210 ]. This molecule has an anorexigenic action by inducing oxytocin expression in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and, interestingly, preliminary clinical results have shown altered levels of OEA in the cerebrospinal fluid and plasma of subjects recovered from eating disorders [ 48 ]. These preliminary observations could extend the findings of altered levels of endocannabinoids in eating disorders to a more general involvement of acylethanolamides.
Given the important contribution of genetics to AN and BN (in fact, the heritability estimates are similar to disorders typically viewed as biological like schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) human genetic association studies have been performed in order to identify genes involved in these pathologies, including genes belonging to the ECS. Among these, CNR1 and CNR2 (the genes encoding cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors, respectively), as well as the genes encoding the main enzyme responsible in the degradation of AEA, FAAH. N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase (NAAA) which functions similar to FAAH but has a different optimal pH, and monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) also have been studied. The first family-based study involved fifty two families (parents with one or two affected siblings) that were genotyped for the (AAT) trinucleotide repeat of CNR1 gene. The distribution of alleles transmitted to the patients was not found to be significantly different from the non-transmitted parental alleles. However, upon dividing the samples to restricting and binging/purging subtypes of AN, the data analysis revealed a preferential transmission of different alleles in each of the subtypes, suggesting restricting AN and binging/purging AN may be associated with different alleles of the CNR1 gene [ 211 ]. However, a subsequent study involving up to 91 German AN trios (patient with AN and both biological parents) was unable to confirm these results, nor did it show an association for any of 15 single nucleotide polymorphisms representative of regions with restricted haplotype diversity in FAAH, NAAA and MAGL genes [ 212 ]. Another study in 115 overweight/obese subjects with BED, 74 non-BED patients with obesity and 110 normal weight healthy controls investigated one of these FAAH polymorphisms, previously implicated in obesity and BED, reporting a lack of association [ 213 ] and, in a more recent article, these authors studied the association of this FAAH polymorphism and the CNR1 polymorphism in both AN and BN, in 134 patients with AN, 180 patients with BN and 148 normal weight healthy controls [ 214 ]. The authors found a significant increase in the frequency of both polymorphisms in AN and BN patients, a result in sharp contrast with the previous findings by Muller and collaborators that showed a lack of association of these polymorphisms with AN. Additionally, Monteleone and collaborators found a synergistic effect of the two polymorphisms in AN but not in BN. Finally, a couple of recent articles have studied association of CNR2 and GPR55 polymorphisms with anorexia nervosa. The authors detected an association of a CNR2 polymorphism with both AN and BN [ 44 ] in a study comprising 204 subjects with eating disorders and 1876 healthy volunteers in Japanese population. Similarly, an association between the GPR55 polymorphism Gly195Val and anorexia nervosa in a study comprising 235 patients and 1244 controls in a female Japanese population [ 50 ]. Furthermore, in this latter study the polymorphism functionality was checked in Chinese-Hamster-Ovary cells engineered to express human GPR55. The GPR55 containing the Gly195Val polymorphism was found to induce less phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase than Gly195 type GPR55 when cells were treated with anandamide. Taken together, the human genetic association studies show evidence of association between ECS genes and eating disorders, but further studies are necessary to definitively confirm these findings.
4.3.
Therapeutic Use of Cannabinoid Drugs in Eating Disorders
Cannabis preparations have been used for both medicinal and recreational purposes for centuries. Its ancient medicinal use has been primarily related to ameliorate pain and increase appetite in disease states. However, because of their psychostimulant properties and the lack of an adequate body of knowledge, their use in western medicine has been excluded until recently. During the last 20 years this picture has dramatically changed. There has been an exponential increase in the knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying cannabinoid effects, and morphological, physiological and pathophysiological studies have shown that the molecular system supporting these effects ( i.e. , the ECS), is ubiquitous and has a highly relevant role in maintaining whole body homeostasis and, especially, energy homeostasis [ 1 ]. This fact has led to an increased interest in the medical use of cannabinoid-related drugs. Thus, in 1985 the Food and Drug Administration approved Marinol (dronabinol) a synthetically-derived Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) preparation, to relieve nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy in cancer patients who have failed to respond adequately to other antiemetics, and in 1992 this compound was also approved for inducing appetite in acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients suffering from cachexia [ 215 , 216 ]. Similarly, nabilone (a synthetic cannabinoid that mimics THC) was also approved in 1985 for ameliorating the nausea of cancer chemotherapy. A more controversial step forward was the use of a cannabinoid CB1 antagonist/inverse agonist (rimonabant) for management of complicated obesity. Although the Food and Drug Administration never approved this drug, the European Medicine Agency did and Acomplia (the commercial name of rimonabant) was in the market for approximately 2 years. Despite the weight loss and improved cardiometabolic profile observed in obese patients, the drug had to be removed from the market due to its undesirable central side effects (reviewed in [ 16 ]). More recently, Sativex (the combination of THC and cannabidiol) has been marketed in Canada and European countries like the UK and Spain for the treatment of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, and it is currently in phase III clinical development for the treatment of cancer pain.
Taken into account the good therapeutic management of cannabinoids in cachexia and malnutrition associated with cancer and AIDS, it looks feasible that this kind of pharmacotherapy could be also useful in the treatment of eating disorders. Unfortunately, there are only two preclinical studies and two small trials assessing cannabinoid treatments in AN. One animal study, performed on the activity-based anorexia paradigm, showed the ability of both Δ 9 THC and the endocannabinoid uptake inhibitor OMDM-2 in increasing food intake, though they were unable to reverse the weight loss in this animal model [ 217 ]. By contrast, another recent study using the same animal paradigm have shown that Δ 9 THC is capable of reducing the weight loss associated with the development of AN,  via  a mechanism involving reduced energy expenditure [ 218 ]. Regarding the human trials (reviewed in [ 204 ]), the former involved 11 AN patients in a four-week crossover trial and THC treatment resulted in increased sleep disturbances and interpersonal sensitivity, whereas there was no significant effect on weight gain [ 219 ]. Unfortunately, this study raised several concerns given it was an in-patient study and the occasional tube feeding was used. In addition, THC was compared to diazepam instead of placebo, which could be a confounding factor given diazepam has also been reported to increase food intake per se [ 220 ]. The latter involved nine AN out-patients treated with THC. The results showed a significant improvement of depression and perfectionism scores without improving weight gain [ 221 ].
Currently, there is an ongoing phase III clinical trial involving 22 subjects to reveal if severe chronic AN patients treated with Marinol have significant improvement on weight, with secondary objectives of the study being evaluation of eating disorder inventory scale, motor and inner restlessness and endocrine parameters ( https://www.clinicaltrials register.eu ; EudraCT Number: 2007-005631-29). With this very limited number of performed trials (the last one being still not finished) it seems clear that no conclusions can be drawn out regarding the therapeutic validity of a cannabinoid-based approach in eating disorders. However, the satisfactory clinical use of cannabinoid agonists in other pathologies demands and encourages the development of further clinical trials on eating disorders patients.
