Patients
A total of 30 patients admitted to the Orthopaedic Department of “Tor Vergata” University Hospital were enrolled in this study, excluding all subjects with history of cancer, alcohol abuse, diabetes, myopathies or other neuromuscular diseases or chronic administration of corticosteroid for autoimmune diseases (more than 1 month), viral chronic infections (such as hepatitis B virus—HBV, hepatitis C virus—HCV, and human immunodeficiency virus—HIV), and previously surgical implants. Patients were divided into three groups: 10 patients underwent hip arthroplasty for high-energy hip fracture (CTRL), 10 patients underwent hip arthroplasty for osteoarthritis (OA), and 10 patients underwent hip arthroplasty for fragility fracture (OP). Classification of patients into OA and OP was done according to DEXA, 𝑇-score, and radiographic assessment with the Kellgren–Lawrence scale ( Nuti et al., 2019 ). Patients who underwent hip arthroplasty for high-energy hip fracture were considered as a CTRL group because, in contrast to OA and OP patients, they did not suffer from musculoskeletal system diseases typical of aging, such as osteoarthritis and osteoporosis.
Bone Mineral Density Evaluation
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) with a Lunar DXA apparatus (GE Healthcare, Madison, WI, United States) was used to scan the lumbar spine (L1–L4) and femoral (neck and total). According to the manufacturer’s recommendations, BMD was measured in grams per square centimeter, with a coefficient of variation of 0.7% ( Celi et al., 2013 ). BMD was measured on the uninjured limb for patients with fragility fractures; whereas, for all the other patients, measurements were performed on the non-dominant side, with the participants supine on an examination table with their limbs slightly abducted ( Piccirilli et al., 2014 ). DXA evaluation was performed 1 day before surgery for OA patients and 1 month after surgery for CTRL and OP patients. The results were expressed as  T- scores.
Radiographic Analysis
Hip radiographs of all patients were performed to check the fracture or to assess hip osteoarthritis, according to a standard validated protocol ( Kothari et al., 2004 ). All radiographs were independently evaluated at different times by two orthopedists using the Kellgren and Lawrence (K–L) radiographic atlas. This system, proposed in 1957, allows classification of osteoarthritis severity using five grades: grade 0 if no radiographic features of osteoarthritis are present; grade 1 if there is doubtful joint space narrowing (JSN) and possible osteophytic lipping; grade 2 if there are definite osteophytes and possible JSN on the anteroposterior weight-bearing radiograph; grade 3 if there are multiple osteophytes, definite JSN, sclerosis, possible bone deformity; grade 4 if there are large osteophytes, marked JSN, severe sclerosis, and definite bone deformity ( Kellgren and Lawrence, 1957 ). Patients with a grade of K–L ≥ 2 were considered osteoarthritic.
Sampling
Muscle biopsies were taken from the superior portion of the vastus lateralis from CTRL patients undergoing hip arthroplasty for high-energy hip fracture, from OA patients undergoing hip arthroplasty for osteoarthritis, and from OP patients undergoing hip arthroplasty for fragility fracture. The collected samples were subsequently processed for setting up of primary satellite cell cultures, microscopic analysis, and immunocytochemistry. Samples were handled and performed according to approved guidelines. In addition, all experimental procedures were approved by the ethics committee of “Policlinico Tor Vergata” (approval reference number #85/12) and carried out according to the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki). Informed consent was obtained from all patients before surgery.
Isolation and Culture of Primary Human Satellite Cells
Primary cultures of satellite cells were established in monolayers according to Askanas’s protocol ( Askanas and Engel, 1975 ). Muscle tissues were cleaned and transferred to culture dishes with Conditioning Media (CM; Medium 199 containing Earle’s Salts, stable Glutamine, 25 mM HEPES, 42% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), and 1.5% Amphotericin B (Biowest, Nuaillé-France)). After incubation at 37°C overnight and addition 25% Human Plasma (HP) to the CM, culture dishes were again incubated for 7 days at 37°C to verify fibroblast growth. Muscle tissues were removed from clotting media and cut into 1 mm pieces, which were placed in gelatin–plasma-coated dishes (1.5% gelatin). After adding F14 medium [DMEM F14 supplemented with 15% FBS and 0.08% Amphotericin B (Biowest, Nuaillé-France), Penicillin–Streptomycin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, United States), stable Glutamine (Biowest, Nuaillé-France), 0.01 mg/ml human Insulin, 0.05 μg/ml Fibroblast Growth Factor, and 0.01 μg/ml epidermal growth factor], culture dishes were incubated at 37°C for 5–7 days. After substantial growth, tissues were removed, and satellite cells were placed on new culture dishes coated with 0.2% gelatin. As soon as the cells began to fuse into myotubes, they were washed with Hank’s solution without calcium and magnesium and then switched to medium containing F14, 5% FBS, PSF, and human insulin but no growth factor. Cell cultures were fed twice a week until experimental use. After fixation of satellite cells with 4% paraformaldehyde dissolved in 0.9% saline solution for 4 h, two blinded pathologists performed morphological analysis using a Nikon upright microscope ECLIPSE Ci-S/(Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) connected to a Nikon digital camera. Images were acquired at 4× and 20× magnification using NIS-Elements software (5.30.01; Laboratory Imaging, Prague, Czech Republic).
Simulation Research by RPM
The RPM system (Airbus Defence and Space Netherlands B.V.) was used to simulate the biological effects of microgravity on satellite cells ( Borst and Van Loon, 2009 ). All experiments were carefully planned according to procedures previously described ( Wuest et al., 2015 ;  Tarantino et al., 2020 ). The rotating RPM frame was placed inside an ordinary cell culture CO 2  incubator. The software responsible for controlling the motion of RPM employed a tailored algorithm, which rotated with a random speed in such a way that the mean gravity vector reliably converged to zero over time. The samples were positioned compactly in the center of rotation, to minimize centrifugal acceleration and to avoid artifacts. For  in vitro  cultivation, we used 24-well plates sealed with dialysis membrane (Visking Medicell International Ltd., Liverpool Road—London code DTV12000.06.000 MWCO 12/14 Kdalton). Each well was sealed by deposition of a dialysis membrane on the convex liquid meniscus of the medium inside the well to prevent the formation of air bubbles. The nitrocellulose discs were fixed to the support by means of a rubber ring to minimize the effects of flow shear on the attached cells. Primary satellite cell cultures were exposed to RPM for 72 h; while plates exposed to normogravity regime were kept in incubator for the same period, so that all cell samples shared the same experimental conditions.
Immunostaining of Primary Human Satellite Cells
The expression of the Pax7 by immunofluorescence was evaluated for the characterization of satellite cells from CTRL, OA, and OP patients. After fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde dissolved in 0.9% saline solution for 30 min, cell cultures were pretreated with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) citrate, pH 7.8 for 20 min at 95°C, and incubated with rabbit monoclonal anti-Pax7 antibodies for 60 min (clone NC, Novus Biologicals). Reaction was revealed by using Texas red anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO, United Sates). Washing was performed with PBS/Tween20 pH 7.6 (UCS Diagnostic, Rome, Italy). Finally, cells were counteracted with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) counterstain (Kreatech Biotechnology B.V., Amsterdam, Netherlands).
Immunocytochemistry
Immunocytochemical characterization was performed on culture dishes after fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde dissolved in 0.9% saline solution for 30 min to assess myostatin expression in all primary cultures of satellite cells ( Tarantino et al., 2020 ). Cell samples were pretreated with EDTA citrate, pH 7.8 for 30 min at 95°C, and then incubated for 1 h with rabbit monoclonal anti-myostatin (clone ab134682, AbCam, Cambridge, United Kingdom). Washings were performed with PBS/Tween20 pH 7.6 (UCS Diagnostic, Rome, Italy); horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-3,3′ diaminobenzidine (DAB) Detection Kit (UCS Diagnostic, Rome, Italy) was used to reveal immunocytochemical reactions. Specifically, 50 μl DAB/450 μl of substrate was incubated for 3 min. To assess the background of immunostaining, we included negative controls for each reaction by incubating the sections with secondary antibodies (HRP) alone or a detection system (DAB) alone. Immunocytochemical positivity was assessed on digital images acquired with NIS-Elements software (5.30.01; Laboratory Imaging, Prague, Czech Republic) using a semi-quantitative approach, scoring from 1 to 3 based on the number of positive myotubes out of the total analyzed for myostatin. Results were shown as percentage of positive myotubes. For each patient, the experiment was conducted in triplicate ( n  = 30/group).
Primary Cultures of Human Satellite Cells Conditioned With Anti-MSTN Antibodies
The role of myostatin in the activity of primary cultures of human satellite cells exposed to RPM was investigated by their treatment with anti-MSTN antibodies (clone ab134682, AbCam, Cambridge, United Kingdom). Specifically, cells from the first or second passage were seeded in a 24-well plate at a density of 10 × 10 3  cells/well. Primary cultures derived from each patient group were incubated with 1 μg/ml anti-MSTN antibodies and exposed to RPM for 72 h. The control experiment was performed by injecting a 0.9% saline solution (Vehicle) into the primary cultures of the same patients also subjected to 72 h of RPM exposure. At the end of the experiment, cell cultures were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde dissolved in 0.9% saline solution for 30 min and subjected to Toluidine blue staining to study cell proliferation and morphology.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8 Software (Prism 8.0.1, La Jolla, CA, United States). Clinical data were analyzed by the Mann–Whitney test. For immunocytochemistry, data were expressed as mean ± SEM, and  n  represents the percentage of myostatin-positive myotubes number. Data were compared with one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparison test and were considered significantly different if  p  < 0.05.
