Obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) is a condition characterized by obstructive sleep apnea and insufficient ventilation caused by a collapse or blockage of the upper airway during sleep. Sleep defects, daytime naps, fatigue, and frequent drops in oxygen saturation (SpO 2 ) are associated with this condition. The incidence of OSAHS in the United States is 2–4% [ 1 ]. OSAHS patients are in a hypoxic state and often have closely related complications, such as cardiovascular disease, cognitive decline, and altered cranial and maxillofacial development [ 2 – 4 ]. The incidence of periodontal disease in patients with OSAHS is higher than that in healthy people [ 5 – 7 ].
Periodontal disease is initiated and sustained by the imbalance between the oral microbial community in microbial biofilms and the host inflammatory response [ 8 ,  9 ]. It is characterized by its occurrence in the supporting tissues of the teeth, including gingival disease involving only gingival tissues and periodontitis affecting deep periodontal tissues, thereby causing alveolar bone resorption and ultimately leading to tooth loss [ 10 ]. Further, periodontal disease is associated with a variety of systemic diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and inflammatory bowel disease [ 11 ,  12 ].
The upregulation of inflammatory mediators in periodontal tissue can lead to the occurrence and development of disease. The inflammatory factor IL-1 β  is involved in the pathogenesis of periodontitis and has been widely studied because it stimulates the recruitment and differentiation of osteoclasts in tissues and contributes to bone absorption during periodontitis [ 13 ]. Inflammasomes are multiprotein complexes that can induce inflammatory responses in cells and play an important role in the inflammatory response of various tissues. Among them, the nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome is the most prominent in the NLR family and is proven to be involved in innate immune responses to infection, inflammation, and chronic diseases [ 14 ]. The NLRP3 inflammasome complex is composed of NLRP3, recruitment domain (ASC), and caspase-1 [ 15 ]. In response to tissue sensing inflammatory stimuli, procaspase-1 is activated and cleaves IL-1 β  into its biologically active form. Previous studies have shown that hypoxia can regulate the NLRP3 inflammasome expression through TXNIP expression [ 16 ,  17 ]. Meanwhile, overexpression of NLRP3 in gingival tissue and increased NLRP3 salivary levels have been observed in patients with periodontitis [ 18 ]. The ROS/TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome signaling pathway may play an important role in the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. Patients with OSAHS are hypoxic, and the tissues often have oxidative stress. When the body is in a hypoxic state, too many reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the respiratory chain complex cannot be cleared in time, leading to adverse reactions, such as cell DNA damage, resulting in cell dysfunction and even death. This response is known as oxidative stress [ 19 ]. Previous studies have shown that upon its separation from thioredoxin, thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) expression levels increase, a necessary process leading to oxidative stress in the body. Increased TXNIP expression levels can activate NRLP3 inflammasomes directly and eventually induce an inflammatory response [ 20 – 22 ].
Current studies have shown that there appears to be low evidence for the association between OSAHS and periodontitis [ 23 ], and the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the association between the two conditions remain unclear. We hypothesized that there is a possible correlation between OSAHS and periodontal disease. OSAHS may affect the incidence of periodontal diseases through the ROS/TXNIP/NLRP3 inflammasome signaling pathway.
This study was aimed at elucidating and providing evidence for the pathophysiological mechanism underlying the correlation between OSAHS and periodontal diseases.
