In this study, we demonstrated that the combination of TNF and IFN-γ up-regulated the surface expression of the cytokine receptors TACI, BCMA, BAFF-R, Fn14, IFN-γR, ObR, CD40L and also the membrane-bound form of the B cell survival cytokine BAFF in RASF. IFN-γ further enhanced TNF-induced proliferation of RASF while inhibiting IL-6 and IL-8 production. On the other hand, TNF reduced IFN-γ-induced BAFF production. Activation of Fn14 with TWEAK increased TNF-induced proliferation while it decreased TNF-induced IL-6 production by RASF. In RASF/murine B cell co-cultures we found RASF to strongly support B cell survival and this was further enhanced by the addition of BAFF. In addition, RASF stimulated with IFN-γ or TNF increased B cell survival while a combination of both reduced survival. Survival might be linked to the expression and increased shedding of VCAM-1 and membrane-bound TGF-β which are up-regulated by TNF/IFN-γ. To our knowledge, this is the first study that investigated the regulation of surface levels of BAFF, BAFF-R, BCMA, TACI, Fn14, CD40L, ObR and IFN-γR on isolated RASF. In contrast to results from Nakajima  et al ., we detected BAFF-R on the cell surface of RASF which was increased by TNF/IFN-γ 28 . BCMA and TACI have already been shown to be expressed on RASF and rat arthritic fibroblasts, respectively, but their regulation has not been investigated 14 , 15 . In line with data from Kamijo  et al . we detected Fn14 on RASF and found that TNF alone and TNF/IFN-γ are inducers of its expression 29 . Since we used IFN-γ as one major stimulus, we were also interested in the regulation of its receptor and showed an increase in response to TNF/IFN-γ. This is in line with results from Alvaro-Gracia  et al . who demonstrated an increase of IFN-γ binding after TNF stimulation on RASF 30 . Binding of IFN-γ to its receptor is usually associated with a downregulation of IFN-γR, but this does not occur in fibroblasts 31 , 32 . We also assessed the influence of IFN-γ and TNF on leptin recepter (ObR) expression and found this combination to increase ObR surface levels. Like IFN-γR, ObR signaling is initiated by JAK/STAT activation and some effects of IFN-γ are potentiated by leptin which has been associated with disease activity in RA 18 , 33 . In addition, TNF has been shown to increase surface levels of ObR by the activation of protein kinase C 34 . Functionally, leptin has already been shown to increase IL-6 levels in SF but we did not observe a potentiation of TNF or TNF/IFN-γ effects in RASF by leptin. In a next step, we investigated the expression of molecules important for B cell survival and activation in RASF. An indispensable co-stimulatory protein to activate B cells in a T cell dependent manner is CD40L, whose expression by RASF in contrast to CD40, has not been demonstrated directly. The ability of RASF to activate B cells and induce antibody class switching, however, suggests CD40L expression 35 – 37 . Indeed, we found CD40L on the surface of RASF and its levels were augmented by TNF/IFN-γ which might support B cell activation by RASF under these conditions. Another important molecule for B cell function is BAFF, which enhances the survival and class switching of (autoreactive) B cells 13 , 37 . We found an increase of membrane-bound BAFF on RASF after stimulation with TNF/IFN-γ, whereas soluble BAFF was induced only by IFN-γ and inhibited by TNF. This somewhat contrasts results from Reyes  et al . that showed increased BAFF levels after TNF stimulation but supports data from Alsaleh  et al . who demonstrated reduced BAFF expression in response to TNF 38 , 39 . However, reported TNF-induced BAFF levels in the study by Reyes were extremely low (below 10 pg/ml) and we considered such low amounts as baseline level in our study since control values for BAFF in unstimulated RASF were between 0 and 10 pg/ml. Since we found an upregulation of cytokine receptors TACI, BAFF-R, BCMA, ObR and IFN-γR after stimulation with TNF/IFN-γ, we next investigated whether ligands for these receptors have any impact on proliferation or cytokine production by RASF. We found IFN-γ to further enhance TNF-induced proliferation with a concomitant reduction in IL-6 and IL-8 production. With respect to RASF proliferation this contrasts results from Alvaro-Garcia  et al ., who showed reduced proliferation when TNF was combined with IFN-γ 40 . This might be due to different culture conditions since we used RPMI medium with only 2% FCS while the above mentioned study used DMEM with 10% FCS. We found only minimal basal proliferation using our culture conditions, with strong induction of proliferation upon addition of cytokines. Using less stringent culture conditions, where basal proliferation is already significant, IFN-γ might exert different effects. Additionally, Alvaro-Garcia  et al . demonstrated that IFN-γ reduced collagenase expression in RASF, which supports our observations regarding IL-6 production, since collagenase and IL-6 are both induced by TNF and employ overlapping transcriptional regulation of mRNA synthesis 41 , 42 . In line with the inhibitory effects of IFN-γ on RASF, studies from Schlaak  et al . and Ohta  et al . showed reduced IL-6 production when IL-4 was combined with IFN-γ and diminished IL-8 production when IFN-γ and TNF were added together, respectively 43 , 44 . Our results demonstrated a dual role of IFN-γ on inflammation: It cooperates with TNF to up-regulate membrane-bound cytokines and receptors on RASF while concomitantly decreasing the release of cytokines IL-6 and IL-8. IFN-γ is usually produced in a TH1-biased environment during the development of the adaptive immune response and in this situation it might be detrimental to attract innate immune cells such as neutrophils that cannot support a T cell/ B cell response. In fact, it has been demonstrated that IFN-γ priming of macrophages before an LPS challenge reduced the production of mediators necessary for leukocyte recruitment 45 .
We further examined the impact of TWEAK, APRIL, BAFF and leptin on TNF and TNF/IFN-γ induced proliferation and IL-6/IL-8 production. TWEAK supported TNF but not TNF/IFN-γ induced proliferation and reduced IL-6 production only when induced by TNF but not by TNF/IFN-γ. While Yamana  et al . also found TWEAK to reduce TNF-induced proliferation and IL-6 synthesis in RASF, TWEAK increased TNF-induced proliferation in our study 17 . In contrast to Yamana  et al ., we incubated RASF for 72 h instead of 48 h and included different TNF concentrations. In addition, like mentioned above with IFN-γ, we used only 2% FCS in culture medium for proliferation assays, which might change the effects of TWEAK from inhibitory to stimulatory. TWEAKs ability to promote proliferation is in line with  in vivo  results, where TWEAK has been shown to stimulate wound-healing 46 , 47 . APRIL modestly increased TNF-induced proliferation but not IL-6 or IL-8 production. In contrast, data from Nagatani  et al . showed that APRIL fosters IL-6 mRNA expression in RASF, but this study investigated the effects of APRIL without concomitant stimulation with TNF 15 . In addition, the same study demonstrated significant APRIL mRNA production by RASF, which was not confirmed on protein level of soluble APRIL by our results or by Alsaleh  et al . 37 . However, APRIL might be present in a membrane-bound form, which has been demonstrated on the surface of macrophages 48 . Overall, the effects of APRIL on RASF are weak and might only be relevant before the adaptive immune response takes over. BAFF exerted no influence on proliferation, IL-6 and IL-8 production of RASF. In HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells however, BAFF serves as an autocrine stimulator of basal NFκB activity by binding to intracellular BAFF-R 49 . Since we only employed surface staining of BAFF-R, there might still be a receptor pool located intracellularly. Addition of exogenous BAFF likely activates membrane-bound BAFF-R exclusively, which does not exclude a specialized role of intracellular BAFF in RASF, which needs to be defined in future studies.
Since we found synergistic and antagonistic effects of IFN-γ when combined with TNF on RASF, we were interested how RASF treated with these cytokines regulate B cell survival in co-cultures. We used murine B cells isolated from spleens as they do respond to human BAFF and CD40L, but only minimally to human TNF and not to human IFN-γ minimizing own effects of these cytokines 50 – 53 . Murine B cells cultured alone showed very little survival after 48 h, but survival was enhanced when conditioned medium of RASF was added, suggesting a pro-survival effect of a RASF-derived soluble factor. When murine B cells were cultured with RASF directly survival rates quadrupled compared to conditioned medium. This confirms results from Alasaleh  et al . that showed that cell-cell contact is a prerequisite for class switch recombination in B cell RASF co-cultures and they identified BAFF as a major factor 37 . We also demonstrated that addition of BAFF alone or to co-cultures increased B cell survival and this was inhibited by the addition of the monoclonal anti-BAFF antibody belimumab. Although belimumab was considered to only block soluble BAFF, subsequent studies found that this antibody also inhibits membrane-bound BAFF 54 , and there are hints that inhibition of membrane BAFF might also be relevant in a clinical setting 55 . An effect on membrane bound BAFF might explain its inhibitory effect on B cells cultivated with unstimulated RASF, as they produce no soluble BAFF but do display membrane-bound BAFF under these conditions. We identified IFN-γ as the sole inducer of soluble BAFF in SF and therefore tested whether RASF stimulated with this cytokine increase B cell survival. Indeed, IFN-γ-stimulated RASF enhanced murine B cell survival and this effect was inhibited by belimumab, suggesting an influence of BAFF. Since membrane-bound BAFF was not modified by IFN-γ, soluble BAFF might be important as it is induced by IFN-γ. While TNF-stimulated RASF did not increase B cell survival, the combination of TNF and IFN-γ reduced survival compared to treatment with each cytokine alone. This was puzzling, since this combination was the strongest inducer of membrane-bound BAFF which is supposed to be indispensable for B cell survival 12 . However, RASF not only support B cell survival by BAFF but they also express other proteins involved in regulating B cell function. Another regulator of B cell survival, vascular cellular adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), which is the cellular receptor for integrin α4β1 on B cells, is expressed in RASF 56 . Interestingly, we found TNF and to a lesser extent TNF/IFN-γ to up-regulate cell-bound VCAM-1, but only the combination strongly induced soluble VCAM-1. This suggests that IFN-γ when combined with TNF induces the shedding of VCAM-1 possibly by regulating a specific enzyme e.g. ADAM17 23 . Soluble VCAM-1 might then compete with membrane-bound VCAM-1 on RASF inhibiting cell-cell contact and thereby diminishing the pro-survival effect of RASF. Another cytokine that regulates B cell function is TGF-β and it is produced by RASF 57 . We detected the membrane-bound form on RASF, which was up-regulated by TNF and even more so by the combination of TNF and IFN-γ. TGF-β regulates many aspects of B cell function from Ig production to apoptosis and an up-regulation on RASF might reduce B cell survival 26 .
In addition to RASF, we also analyzed SF from patients with osteoarthritis (OA) as a non-chronically inflamed control. In all assays, we didn’t find any difference between OASF and RASF (data not shown). However, in vivo this might be completely different, since high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. TNF, IFN-γ) are only found in RA but not OA synovial tissue 58 . Hence, the in vitro observed up-regulation of receptors and cytokines of the TNF family in response to TNF/IFN-γ likely occurs in RASF exclusively.
