In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), interferon-γ (IFN-γ) levels are increased in synovial fluid and concomitantly, synovial fluid mononuclear cells show increased IFN-γ mRNA levels 1 , 2 . IFN-γ has a dual role in chronic inflammation since it does increase the presentation of antigens via induction of MHC class II molecules in synovial fibroblasts (SF) and foster chemokine production 3 , 4 . Conversely, IFN-γ counteracts matrix metalloprotease production by IL-1β and increases production of the IL-18 scavenger IL-18 binding protein in SF 5 , 6 . In addition, several studies already evaluated IFN-γ as an anti-arthritic therapy and reported a modest beneficial effect on pain and joint swelling 7 – 10 . These findings are further emphasized by the fact that IFN-γ receptor (IFN-γR, CD119) knockout mice are highly susceptible to the development of arthritis 11 . In rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASF), IFN-γ has been found to increase the expression of B cell activating factor (BAFF, CD257) 12 . BAFF is a member of the TNF superfamily of ligands and receptors and is an important cytokine for the survival of autoreactive B cells 13 . Besides BAFF, SF express the related molecules B cell maturation antigen (BCMA, CD269), BAFF receptor (CD268), Fn14 (TWEAK receptor, CD266) transmembrane activator and CAML interactor (TACI, CD267) and possibly membrane-bound APRIL (a proliferation  i nducing  l igand, CD256) 14 – 16 . Although some effects of APRIL and TWEAK (TNF-related weak inducer of apoptosis) on cytokine production and proliferation in SF have been described, it is still unclear how these ligands influence SF function 14 , 15 , 17 . In addition, the effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines on the expression of CD266, CD267, CD268, CD269 and CD154 have not been investigated. In this study, we shed light on the regulation of these surface receptors by cytokines, which play an important role in RA (TNF and IFN-γ) and further provide evidence that SF pre-stimulated with these cytokines differentially influence B cell survival. In addition we investigated the surface levels of ObR (leptin receptor) and influence of leptin on the effects of TNF and IFN-γ, since leptin has been shown to enhance IFN-γ signaling by activating JAK/STAT pathways 18 .
