2.1. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on the Cell Viability of hORSCs
First, we examined whether MSCT could increase the cell viability of hORSCs. The concentration of hHMSCs used was 5 × 10 4  cells/well, according to a previous study [ 9 ]. To determine time-dependent effects, hORSCs were co-cultured with hHMSCs for 24 h and 48 h. Cell viability was estimated by MTT assays ( Figure 1 ). The results showed that treatment with hHMSCs enhanced hORSC viability at 24 h and 48 h. While IFN-γ significantly decreased the cell viability of hORSCs, when co-cultured with hHMSCs, hORSC viability increased up to ~130% compared to the controls. Furthermore, MSCT upregulated hORSC viability in the IFN-γ–pretreated group compared to the IFN-γ-only treated group. This tendency was similar to that seen when hHMSCs were treated for 24 h and 48 h. In this study, we used 24 h for hHMSC and hORSC co-cultures in all experiments.
2.2. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on NLRP3 Inflammasome Components
To investigate whether NLRP3 inflammasome activation was related to MSCT in hORSCs, we examined the expression of  NLRP3, Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC), caspase-1, and IL-1β  at the mRNA levels. As shown in  Figure 2 ,  NLRP3, ASC, caspase-1, and IL-1β  were significantly increased in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the controls. There was no significant difference in the expression levels in the MSCT group compared to the controls, whereas the expression of inflammasome components was upregulated in the IFN-γ-treated group, and downregulated by additional MSCT.
2.3. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on HF-IP Collapse-Related Genes
To further investigate the association between anagen arrest and re-entry by MSCT in hORSCs, we examined the expression  of CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, TNF-α, IL-10, IL-15, IL-18, IFN-γR,  and Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I chain-related protein A (MICA) at the mRNA level ( Figure 3 ). As shown in  Figure 3 , the hair follicle immune privilege (HF-IP) collapse-related gene ( Figure 3 A–I) expression levels were significantly increased in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the controls. The changes in expression were not significantly different following MSCT compared to the controls. Compared to the IFN-γ-treated group, the expressions were suppressed by MSCT in the IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group and the MSCT group. The expression level of the anti-inflammatory cytokine  IL-10  was upregulated by MSCT compared to the controls ( Figure 3 E). Changes in the expression of  IL-10  were not significant in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the controls. Compared to the IFN-γ-treated group,  IL-10  expression was increased by MSCT in the IFN-γ-hHMSCs-treated group and the MSCT group.
2.4. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling Pathway Molecules
We measured the expression of Wnt/β-catenin genes by real-time PCR to investigate the roles of MSCT ( Figure 4 ). The results showed that MSCT significantly upregulated the mRNA expression levels of  WNT3, WNT5, WNT7, WNT10, GSK-3β, β-catenin ,  Cyclin D1, Lymphoid-enhancer factor-1 (LEF1)  and  AXIN2  compared to the controls. Additionally, IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group increased the mRNA expression levels of  WNT3, WNT5, WNT10, GSK-3β, β-catenin, Cyclin D1, LEF1  and  AXIN2 , which was decreased by IFN-γ. The mRNA levels of  WNT7  were significantly increased only in the MSCT group.
As shown in  Figure 4 B, MSCT downregulated the expression levels of  DKK1  in the MSCT group with and without IFN-γ treatment compared to the controls. The change in  TGF-β2  expression was not significant in the MSCT group compared to the controls. The expression levels of  DKK1  and  TGF-β2  were increased in the IFN-γ-treated group and were suppressed by MSCT.
We also investigated the effects of MSCT on the WNT/β-catenin pathway at the protein level by Western blotting ( Figure 5 ). The levels of β-catenin and phosphorylation of GSK-3β were increased in the MSCT group compared to the controls. Compared to the IFN-γ-treated group, β-catenin and the phosphorylation of GSK-3β were upregulated by MSCT in the IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group and the MSCT group. In contrast, the level of DKK1 was increased in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the controls, and DKK1 was significantly reverted by MSCT. The protein expressions were similar to the mRNA levels ( Figure 4 ).
2.5. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on Hair Stem Cell Markers
We investigated the effects of MSCT on hair stem cell markers at the protein expression level ( Figure 5 ). Whereas the levels of SRY-Box Transcription Factor 9(SOX9), CD34, and CD200 were significantly decreased in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the controls, their levels were significantly increased in the MSCT group compared to the controls. The expression of SOX9 and CD200 was upregulated by MSCT in the IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group and the differences were statistically significant compared to the IFN-γ-treated controls ( Figure 5 B). CD34 protein expression was increased by additional MSCT in the IFN-γ-treated group, but the change was not significant ( Figure 5 ). We also measured the expression of  Keratin15  genes by qPCR ( Figure 5 C). The results showed that MSCT significantly upregulated the mRNA expression levels of  Keratin15  compared to the controls. Additionally, IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group increased the expression level of mRNA of  Keratin15 , which was decreased by IFN-γ.
2.6. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on Growth Factors
Next, we examined the growth factors at the mRNA expression level. Insulin-like growth factor 1(IGF1), fibroblast growth factor 2(FGF2), fibroblast growth factor 7(FGF7), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), sonic hedgehog (SHH), bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2), and BMP4 are representative growth factors associated with hair growth.
As shown in  Figure 6 , the expression levels of FGF7, VEGF, and PDGF were significantly suppressed in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the controls. The expression levels of IGF1, FGF2, SHH, BMP2 and BMP4 were suppressed by IFN-γ treatment but the change was not significant compared to the controls. Interestingly, the levels of all growth factors including  IGF1, FGF2, FGF7, VEGF, PDGF, SHH, BMP2  and  BMP4  in response to MSCT were significantly upregulated compared to the control or IFN-γ-treated groups in this study.
2.7. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on the JAK/STAT Pathway
We examined the effects of MSCT on the JAK/STAT signaling pathway at the protein level using Western blotting ( Figure 7 ). Overall, the expression of JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and STAT1, STAT2, STAT3 proteins in the IFN-γ-treated group was upregulated compared to the controls, and phosphorylation and some total protein levels in the Western blots were downregulated by MSCT ( Figure 7 A).
The level of phosphorylation of JAK1-3 was significantly increased in IFN-γ-treated cells compared to the controls. Phosphorylation was significantly suppressed by MSCT compared to the IFN-γ-treated controls ( Figure 7 B). The levels of phosphorylated STAT1 and STAT3 were also increased by IFN-γ treatment, and the expression of STAT1 phosphorylation was decreased by additional MSCT. Whereas the expression of STAT3 was suppressed by MSCT compared to controls, the change in IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group was not significant compared to both controls and IFN-γ-treated group. The effect of IFN-γ or MSCT on the expression of STAT2 was not remarkable.
Next, we also investigated the effect of MSCT on IFN-γR and IL-15, which are the key cytokines in JAK/ STAT pathway activation. The level of IFN-γR was increased in the IFN-γ-treated group compared to the control and was suppressed by MSCT. IL-15 was only expressed in the IFN-γ-treated group and MSCT blocked the expression of IL-15 ( Figure 7 ).
2.8. Effect of hHMSC Treatment on hORSC Migration Ability
Next, the effect of MSCT on hORSC migration was examined by the crystal violet assay using six-well polycarbonate Transwell inserts. As shown in  Figure 8 , cell migration ability was decreased in the IFN-γ-treated group but increased in the hHMSC co-culture group compared to the controls. Compared to the IFN-γ-treated group, the migration ability of the IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group and the hHMSC-only group was significantly increased. The quantitative determination of transferred cells is shown in  Figure 8 C.
2.9. Effects of hHMSCs Treatment on the Mouse Vibrissa HF Organ Culture
To examine the effect of MSCT at the organ level, we performed an ex vivo culture of mouse vibrissae HFs. In this study, 20 HFs were cultured individually with control, IFN-γ, IFN-γ plus MSCT, or MSCT. Each hair shaft was measured every third day.
As shown in  Figure 9 , HFs and the hair shaft in the MSCT group grew longer than the control, and hair bulb structure was preserved at 10 days. The hair shaft of the IFN-γ-treated group did not grow longer than control and the hair bulb was changed. We observed the hair separated from the follicle and the morphology of the hair bulb was curved, which are catagen-like regressive changes. The IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group also showed growth of the hair shaft compared to the control. Compared to the IFN-γ treated group, the hair bulb of the IFN-γ-hHMSC-treated group was preserved and the hair shaft was longer.
