Sulfite oxidase is a mitochondrial enzyme that is vital for the detoxification of SO 3 2– . Inactivation of SO, in either ISOD or MoCD, leads to severe neurodegeneration, often with lethal outcome. While mitochondrial impairment has been observed following SO 3 2–  treatment of different model systems ( Vincent et al., 2004 ;  Zhang et al., 2004 ;  Grings et al., 2013 ), the underlying mechanism and role of mitochondrial damage within the context of SO deficiency remains poorly understood. In this study, we show that mitochondria in  Suox –/–  and patient fibroblasts are abnormally elongated and interconnected. Application of exogenous SO 3 2–  on WT fibroblasts induced similar morphological changes in the mitochondrial network, suggesting that SO 3 2–  accumulation in SO-deficient cells directly mediates alterations in mitochondrial function. This pathomechanism provides a new concept underlying SO 3 2–  toxicity in the SO deficiencies.
We found that cellular viability and ATP production under galactose treatment was markedly reduced in  Suox –/–  MEFs, indicating that the mitochondria in those cells are dysfunctional and thus unable to produce sufficient ATP via OXPHOS. In line with this, one of the earliest identified toxic effects of SO 3 2–  was a dose-dependent reduction of total cellular ATP levels ( Zhang et al., 2004 ). Moreover, direct treatment of SO 3 2–  also decreased ATP production from mitochondria isolated from rat renal epithelial cells ( Vincent et al., 2004 ). Therefore, it is likely that elevated SO 3 2–  levels, due to the lack of SO, lead to the inhibition of mitochondrial ATP production and reduced viability upon longer cultivation in galactose.
In a recent study,  Grings et al. (2019)  reported that  MOCS1  patient fibroblasts display altered protein levels of mitofusins 1 and 2, indicating a disturbance of mitochondrial dynamics. We analyzed the mitochondrial network in different cell culture models of SO deficiency and found that the mitochondria were hyperfused in the vast majority of SO-deficient cells. Furthermore, treatment of WT cells with low SO 3 2–  concentrations (up to 40 μM) resulted in similar morphological changes, suggesting that the observed abnormalities are directly mediated by SO 3 2– . Hyperfusion is known as a typical response to mild mitochondrial stress, for example nutrient starvation, as it allows to separate mitochondria within one cell to exchange their contents and thereby help to “recover” individual damaged mitochondria ( Rugarli et al., 2012 ). However, treatment of WT cells with high SO 3 2–  concentrations (more than 50 μM) lead to increased mitochondrial fragmentation, indicating that at this point, the mitochondrial damage becomes too severe to be repaired. Mitochondrial fragmentation can be induced by various different forms of stress and allows the removal of terminally damaged mitochondria by mitophagy ( Rugarli et al., 2012 ). In particular, inhibition of the mitochondrial enzymes malate dehydrogenase and glutamate dehydrogenase has been shown for SO 3 2–  concentrations of 100 μM and higher ( Zhang et al., 2004 ). Inhibition of the central metabolic enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase could lead to a decreased metabolic flux through the TCA cycle, which might further contribute to the reduced ATP production, thereby inducing fragmentation.
Hyperfusion of mitochondria may be induced by an increase in fusion or a decrease in fission processes. We detected a decrease in mitochondrial motility in  Suox –/–  cells, which might suggest a decrease in fission. Correct function of Drp1, a GTPase that mediates mitochondrial fission, is regulated by a number of different mechanisms, such as recruitment to the outer mitochondrial membrane by recruiting factors as well as post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation or nitrosylation ( Suárez-Rivero et al., 2016 ). Following our initial findings, further studies are needed to elucidate the exact mechanism of how SO 3 2–  alters mitochondrial dynamics.
The most affected organ in the SO deficiencies is the nervous system. Interestingly, this is also the case in many other disorders of disrupted mitochondrial dynamics. Both Drp1 and mitofusin-2 are required for neuronal development and dysregulation of either protein is associated with a neurological disorder ( Suárez-Rivero et al., 2016 ). For example, mitofusin-2 is necessary for cerebellar development in mice ( Chen et al., 2007 ), and dominant negative variants of mitofusin-2 are associated with Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2A, a length dependent peripheral neuropathy in man ( Kijima et al., 2005 ). Drp1 on the other hand has been associated with multiple disorders, including Huntington’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Parkinson’s disease ( Song et al., 2011 ,  2013 ;  Wang et al., 2011 ).
Among the group of mitochondrial disorders, there is another disease of sulfur metabolism, called ethylmalonic encephalopathy or ETHE1 deficiency ( Tiranti et al., 2004 ). Similar to SO deficiencies, patients present with early onset progressive neurological degeneration, psychomotor retardation and excretion of ethylmalonic acid in urine, resulting in death in the first few years of life ( Tiranti et al., 2004 ). ETHE1 patients accumulate high levels of H 2 S and thiosulfate in biological fluids and tissues, the latter also being elevated in ISOD and MoCD. Intriguingly, H 2 S has been reported to interfere with cellular respiration via inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase ( Tiranti et al., 2009 ). First attempts have recently been made to improve mitochondrial respiratory function in fibroblasts from ETHE1 and MOCS1 patients by treating cells with the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant JP4-039 ( Grings et al., 2019 ). While these results are promising, future studies should aim for further dissection of the underlying molecular mechanisms that primarily drive mitochondrial pathology in neuronal tissues of SO deficiency models in order to provide new therapy options. In summary, we show here that mitochondrial dynamics are impaired by SO 3 2–  and dysregulated in SO deficiencies, thereby providing further evidence that SO deficiencies join the large and diverse family of mitochondrial disorders.
