Metastasis is a hallmark of malignant tumors and is responsible for 90% of cancer-related deaths [ 2 ]. Understanding the mechanisms of cancer cell movement, the discovery of markers for assessment of invasive and metastatic potential, and the development of the therapeutics for prevention of cancer dissemination are some of the main challenges in oncology. In this study, we used the intratumor morphological heterogeneity in breast cancer, mainly solid and trabecular arrangements of tumor cells possessing mesenchymal and invasive traits [ 12 ], as a model for the identification of molecules associated with breast cancer invasion and metastasis. Our results indicate that positive expression of KIF14 and Mieap and negative expression of EZR at the tips of the torpedo-like structures are significantly associated with breast cancer metastasis. KIF14- and Mieap-positive and EZR-negative cells were mainly detected in the torpedo-like structures of the same breast tumors; however, their transcriptomic features differed. This probably indicates the presence of three functionally-distinct types of tumor cells at the tips of the torpedo-like structures. It is important to note that distant metastasis was not associated either with just the presence of torpedo-like structures or KIF14, Mieap, and EZR expression in other morphological structures. Thus, the activity of KIF14, Mieap, and EZR at the tips of the torpedo-like structures predetermines the metastatic potential of breast cancer and KIF14- and Mieap-positive and EZR-negative tumor cells are most likely potential metastasis-initiating cells.
Torpedo-like structures have been suggested by us recently and are one of the morphological manifestations of the invasive component in breast cancer [ 11 ]. These structures represent the formations of an irregularly elongated, mainly triangular shape, consisting of two to three parallel rows of cells, and have a wide base and a pointed tip of up to three cells. In this study, torpedo-like structures were detected in 54.7% of the breast cancers. The origin of torpedo-like structures and their place in the evolution of intratumor morphological heterogeneity are a subject for further research. Most likely, these tumor cell arrangements detach from solid structures with torpedo-like sprouts and evolve to trabecular structures [ 11 ]. Thus, together with solid and trabecular structures, torpedo-like formations of tumor cells can reflect patterns of collective cell invasion. In this regard, KIF14- and Mieap-positive cells, as well as EZR-negative cells, located at the tips of the torpedo-like structures, can possess migratory and invasive phenotype.
Kinesin-14 (KIF14) is known to play a role in intracellular transport [ 19 ] and is implicated in cytokinesis [ 20 ]. In breast cancer, an increased level of KIF14 is related to high tumor grade and poor overall survival [ 21 ]. The knockdown of KIF14 inhibits migration and invasion of breast tumor cells in vitro [ 22 ]. In our study, KIF14-positive cells located at the tips of the torpedo-like structures show a significant enrichment of upregulated genes associated with ether lipid metabolism. Previously, it was found that increased ether lipid level in tumor cells is correlated with the aggressiveness of cancer [ 23 ]. KIF14-positive cells also demonstrate the significant upregulation of the  NHS  gene encoding a novel regulator of actin remodeling and cell morphology [ 24 ] and long non-coding RNA  CNOT2-DT  (PRANCR) regulating cell cycle progression and clonogenicity [ 25 ]. In addition, KIF14-positive cells show upregulation of the  THBS4  (thrombospondin 4) gene that is known to possess proangiogenic and proinflammatory activity in breast cancer [ 26 , 27 ]. Moreover, the  NHS  and  THBS4  gene expression are associated with RFS in breast cancer patients according to Kaplan–Meier plotter [ 18 ].
Mitochondria-eating protein (Mieap) controls mitochondrial quality by repairing or eliminating unhealthy mitochondria [ 28 , 29 ]. The accumulation of lysosomal proteins in the mitochondria in a Mieap-dependent manner results in mitochondrial autophagy or mitophagy [ 30 ]. Mitochondrial quality control plays a pivotal role in cancer migration and invasion [ 31 ]. Disruption of mitophagy processes leads to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species in the tumor microenvironment, thereby modulating cancer cell growth, migration, invasion, and metastasis [ 29 , 31 , 32 ]. As expected, Mieap-positive cells located at the tips of the torpedo-like structures are enriched in genes involved in mitophagy ( BNIP3 ,  RRAS2 , and  PGAM5 ). These tumor cells also show the significant downregulation of the  FOSB  gene whose depletion was recently found to promote proliferation and growth of triple-negative breast cancer cells by inactivating the p53 pathway [ 33 ]. In addition, the  FOSB  gene is associated with RFS in breast cancer patients according to Kaplan–Meier plotter [ 18 ].
EZR is a member of the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family of proteins, which function as cross-linkers between the plasma membrane and the actin cytoskeleton. Many studies showed that ezrin is involved in the regulation of focal adhesion and invadopodia dynamics [ 34 ], and its overexpression is associated with metastasis of various cancers including breast cancer [ 35 , 36 , 37 ]. Surprisingly, we found that EZR negative expression at the tips of the torpedo-like structures is associated with breast cancer metastasis. EZR-negative tumor cells are enriched in the phagocytosis and the chemokine-mediated signaling pathway. One of the phagocytosis-associated genes,  TLR2  encodes Toll-like receptor 2, which is involved in the release of inflammatory cytokines and facilitation of cancer invasion and metastasis [ 38 , 39 ]. The chemokine-mediated signaling pathway is represented by  SLIT2  and  SLIT3  genes that play a suppressive role in tumor metastasis [ 40 ] and are often epigenetically silenced in a wide variety of cancers including breast cancer [ 41 , 42 , 43 ]. EZR-negative tumor cells also show the significant upregulation of  CD109 ,  ID4 ,  ST8SIA1 , and  NR4A1  genes. In breast cancer, CD109, ID4, and ST8SIA1 are involved in the maintenance of stem cell phenotype [ 44 , 45 , 46 ], whereas NR4A1 promotes TGF-β-induced EMT and invasion [ 47 ]. Besides, these genes are associated with RFS of breast cancer patients according to Kaplan–Meier plotter [ 18 ].
The mechanisms underlying the differential activity of KIF14, Mieap, and EZR in torpedo-like structures are unknown and further research is required. Probably, non-genetic factors may account for changes in the expression of these proteins, because, according to TCGA,  KIF14 ,  EZR , and  SPATA18  genes are very rarely mutated in breast cancer (less than 1%) [ 48 ]. It is also unclear if KIF14- and Mieap-positive and EZR-negative cells interact with each other in torpedo-like structures and whether their cooperation is needed for breast cancer invasion and metastasis. According to previous studies, cellular cooperation is integrally important for effective cancer invasion [ 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ]. Nevertheless, despite these issues, the activity of KIF14, Mieap, and EZR in torpedo-like structures presents an interest for further understanding mechanisms of invasion–metastasis cascade, and can be a potential marker for predicting the risk of breast cancer metastatic spread. In this regard, our results emphasize that several cancer markers together rather than in their singularity could provide a valuable tool for the “metastatic stratification” of breast cancer patients, as previously reported by Massague and colleagues [ 53 , 54 , 55 ]. In other words, metastasis always involves the cooperation of several genes.
The study has several limitations, and the findings should be interpreted with caution. The study group is small and the results should be validated in independent and large cohorts. In addition, research in vitro is required to confirm whether positive expression of KIF14 and Mieap, as well as negative expression of EZR, are critical for breast cancer migration and invasion. In this regard, it would be important to develop the 3D in vitro model that would mimic the intratumor morphological heterogeneity of breast cancer including torpedo-like structures.
