Invasion is the first step towards cancer metastasis [ 1 , 2 ]. During the invasion, cancer cells penetrate surrounding tissue and then intravasate into blood vessels, where they spread via blood flow to distant organs, extravasate and form the micrometastases, which finally outgrow into macroscopic metastases [ 1 ].
According to the classical concept, there are two modes of cancer cell invasion: single-cell (individual) and collective invasion [ 3 ]. The type of cell movement is defined by cellular polarity, actin cytoskeleton organization, and stability of cell–cell junctions [ 4 , 5 , 6 ]. Single-cell invasion is strongly associated with a process of epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), during which cancer cells lose epithelial characteristics and obtain mesenchymal traits, namely increased motility and invasiveness [ 7 , 8 ]. In collective invasion, cancer cells are undergoing a partial EMT when mesenchymal traits are acquired but epithelial features and intercellular contacts are not lost [ 6 , 9 ]. Collectively invading cells can be part of large tumor masses or be formed into groups with the different architectural organization [ 3 , 10 ].
Although the mechanisms of cell migration and invasion have been described quite well, there are currently no effective markers for the identification of invading cancer cells and, therefore, for assessment of the invasive potential of tumors [ 11 ]. These markers could be used to identify patients at the high risk of metastasis and to prescribe therapy aimed at interrupting the metastatic process. In addition, these markers might represent targets for future therapeutics that block invasion and metastasis [ 11 ].
Invasive carcinoma of no special type (invasive ductal carcinoma), the most common form of breast cancer, demonstrates significant intratumor morphological heterogeneity. Breast cancer cells may be single or arranged in either small groups (two to five cells), collectively named discrete groups of tumor cells, or multicellular structures: tubular, alveolar, solid, and trabecular structures ( Figure 1 ). These morphological structures have been found to represent transcriptionally distinct tumor cell populations with varying degrees of EMT and invasiveness and to be associated with breast cancer prognosis. Tubular and alveolar structures are transcriptionally similar and demonstrate similar expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers. Solid structures show an increase in mesenchymal traits but retain epithelial features. Trabecular structures, small groups of tumor cells, and single tumor cells display a pronounced mesenchymal phenotype and a dramatic decrease in epithelial traits [ 12 , 13 ]. Breast cancers with trabecular structures or single tumor cells show increased metastatic potential [ 14 , 15 ]. Based on these results, we assumed that tubular and alveolar structures show decreased invasive potential, whereas solid and trabecular structures, as well as single tumor cells, are highly invasive [ 12 ]. It is important to note that solid structures are morphologically heterogeneous and represented by arrangements with either small bud-like or large torpedo-like sprouts. The last ones probably can detach from solid structures and transform into torpedo-like structures [ 11 ] ( Figure 1 ).
In this study, we aimed to identify the molecules associated with breast cancer invasion and metastasis. The data of gene expression profiling of solid and trabecular structures, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, and the Human Protein Atlas were used to select genes associated with cell migration and with heterogeneous expression at the protein level in breast cancer. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to evaluate the association of the selected proteins with metastasis. The modified immunostaining procedure, fluorescence-guided laser microdissection, and RNA-sequencing were used to investigate the molecular makeup of tumor cells associated with metastasis.
