Polyamines are pleiotropic and abundant aliphatic molecules found in all mammalian cells. Putrescine, spermidine, and spermine bind both RNA and DNA and are involved in various cellular processes such as maintenance of DNA structure, gene expression, RNA folding and bending, and protein translation ( 1 – 3 ). These three biogenic polyamines are thus essential for cell homeostasis, growth, differentiation, division, and death ( 4 ,  5 ). In addition, polyamines exhibit critical effects during pathological conditions through their potent toxicity at high concentration ( 6 ), regulation of inflammation ( 7 ,  8 ), and modulation of oxidative stress ( 9 ,  10 ). In this context, the homeostasis of polyamine content within a non-toxic range through synthesis, degradation, and transport is a considerable challenge for cells.
Putrescine, the first polyamine in the anabolic pathway, is generated by ornithine decarboxylation catalyzed by cytosolic ornithine decarboxylase 1 (ODC1, also known as ODC). Putrescine is then sequentially converted into spermidine and spermine  via  the action of spermidine synthase and spermine synthase, respectively ( 5 ). Importantly, the back conversion of spermine to spermidine and putrescine is a critical step in the regulation of polyamine levels, notably to limit the cytotoxic effects of spermine accumulation ( 11 ). This can be achieved by two metabolic pathways: first, the enzyme spermidine/spermine  N (1)-acetyltransferase 1 catalyzes the acetylation of spermine into  N (1)-acetylspermine and spermidine into  N (1)-acetylspermidine; and then, the oxidation of these two products through the enzyme polyamine oxidase leads to the formation of spermidine and putrescine, respectively. However, this pathway is poorly expressed in the gastrointestinal tract during infection and inflammation ( 12 – 14 ). Second, the flavoenzyme spermine oxidase (SMOX) directly catalyzes the oxidation of spermine to spermidine and yields the generation of 3-aminopropanal and H 2 O 2  ( 15 ). This enzyme is expressed in macrophages ( 9 ,  14 ,  16 ) and epithelial cells ( 9 ,  16 ,  17 ) during infection of the gastrointestinal tract. Moreover, it has been described that the generation of H 2 O 2  by SMOX regulates DNA damage and apoptosis, thus supporting the development of gastric carcinoma during  Helicobacter pylori  infection ( 17 – 19 ) and  Bacteroides fragilis -induced colon tumorigenesis in Min mice ( 16 ). It is important to underline that these data have been obtained by using the pharmacological SMOX inhibitor MDL 72527.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) afflicts nearly two million people in the USA and is increasing worldwide ( 20 ,  21 ). Despite implementation of various biologic therapies, less than half of patients achieve remission. Increased understanding of the potential role of polyamines and SMOX is warranted, given the prior studies implicating SMOX in gastric inflammation and cancer ( 18 ,  19 ) and in human IBD ( 22 ). In this work, we questioned whether SMOX has an important role in the development of colitis. To answer this directly, we used  −/− Smox  mice and two models of experimental colitis: infection with  Citrobacter rodentium  and treatment with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS).
