Understanding the interplay between the microbiome composition and its effects on the cytokines pattern could enable development of novel screening methods for periodontitis. Periodontal risk assessment is extremely important for clinical decision-making. The traditional periodontal diagnosis methods are based on clinical inspection and radiography, and they provide information only on the presence or absence of the disease (Taba et al.,  2005 ). In order to develop a reliable diagnostic method for efficient clinical management, understanding the complex etiology of periodontal disease is imperative (Pihlstrom et al.,  2005 ).
Therefore, the present study aimed to investigate whether there are differences in the combined profile of microbiome and cytokines in individuals with or without periodontitis. The results showed that a higher co-occurrence of genera in periodontitis group compared with the healthy group, as evaluated by Schoener's abundance-based co-occurrence index. The Mantel test revealed a significant concordance between cytokines and microbiota in the healthy group but not in the periodontitis group. Hence, alterations in the polymicrobial community structure leads to disruption in the healthy correlation between cytokines and microbiomes. This dysbiosis between the microbiota and the immune response could be one of the major etiological mechanisms underlying periodontitis. This study could allow the development of a scoring system that cold evaluate the risk of periodontitis in individuals.
The β-diversity comparisons revealed significant differences in the microbial community between the healthy and periodontitis groups. The relative abundance of 14 genera and 43 species was significantly different between the GCF of healthy individuals and individuals with periodontitis, but very few taxa concurred with those previously reported (Griffen et al.,  2012 ; Abusleme et al.,  2013 ; Kirst et al.,  2015 ; Park et al.,  2015 ). Abusleme et al. ( 2013 ) showed that microbiota from periodontitis had higher proportions of  Spirochetes, Synergistetes, Firmicutes , and  Chloroflexi , among other taxa, while the proportions of  Actinobacteria , particularly  Actinomyces , were higher in microbiota from healthy individuals; total  Actinomyces  load, however, remained constant between the two groups. Moreover, little overlap was detected with other study data. For example,  Porphyromonas endodontalis  and  P. gingivalis  are considered to be core species in periodontitis (Abusleme et al.,  2013 ). However,  P. catoniae  was the only differentially enriched  Porphyromonas  species in the present study, with abundance being higher in healthy individuals. Consistent with our finding, previous studies have shown that  P. catoniae  was specifically associated with healthy sites rather than diseased deep pockets (de Lillo et al.,  2004 ; Crielaard et al.,  2011 ). Therefore, the species causing periodontitis are various and depend on various factors such as genetics (both bacterial and host), antibiotics, diet, and carbohydrate types (Khan et al.,  2015 ). Discrepancies among studies could be due to these factors, as well as to the methods used to evaluate the microbiota. To overcome the biases that could be introduced by different habitats, only individuals having very similar living habits were included. In addition, recent antibiotic treatment led to exclusion. The present study used a combination of two high-throughput methods (454 pyrosequencing and RayBio Quantibody Arrays) for identifying the bacteria and cytokines, which is an innovation compared to previous studies (Griffen et al.,  2012 ; Abusleme et al.,  2013 ; Kirst et al.,  2015 ; Park et al.,  2015 ).
Obviously, some microorganisms detected in the present study are pathogens while some other are commensal, are their roles could be different in different environments. The observations made in this study from the Schoener's abundance-based co-occurrence probability analysis revealed different distribution patterns in subjects with periodontitis and healthy subjects, similar to what is observed in oral caries (Zhou et al.,  2016 ). When the microbial community structure of the GCF is disrupted (Lamont and Hajishengallis,  2015 ), there is a transition toward a competitive pattern that may lead to periodontitis. In addition, each component of a biological system affects the other components. Additional studies are necessary to determine the exact inter-relationships among the microorganisms detected here.
The exact dynamic evolution of the bacterial communities during the development of periodontitis is unknown. As stated above, the microbial communities are different among healthy sites and shallow and deep pockets of periodontitis (Abusleme et al.,  2013 ), but how these communities evolve in time is currently unknown. Studies should be designed to determine whether pathogenic bacteria invade susceptibility sites and repel commensal bacteria, or if these pathogenic bacteria are already present and cause the disease following a decrease in host defenses (Darveau,  2010 ). Nevertheless, the disruption of the host response to the microbial communities is involved in periodontitis and it may be responsible, at least in part, for the progression of healthy gingival sites to gingivitis and periodontitis (Darveau,  2010 ). Furthermore, in addition to disrupted host response, keystone pathogens that increase community virulence will promote the progression of periodontitis (Lamont and Hajishengallis,  2015 ).
Microbial dysbiosis is involved in altered host-microbial interaction (Bartold and Van Dyke,  2013 ). In the present study, significantly higher levels of CRP were observed in the periodontitis group while IL-8 was higher in the healthy group, but these results are different from those of previous studies (Cheng et al.,  2014 ). Lagdive et al. ( 2013 ) showed that IL-8 levels were higher in the GCF of patients with periodontitis. Shaddox et al. ( 2011 ) studies diseased and healthy sites within the same individuals and showed that healthy sites had higher IL-8 levels than diseased ones, supported by Teles et al. ( 2010 ). Shojaee et al. ( 2013 ) showed that the saliva of patients with periodontitis had higher levels of CRP compared to controls. Wohlfeil et al. ( 2012 ) showed that CRP was elevated in the saliva of patients with aggressive periodontitis, while IL-8 was similar compared with controls. These inconsistencies among different studies may be attributed to different study methods and the inherent biological diversity between individuals living in different environments, i.e., with different diets, carbohydrate intake, and stress (Seow,  2012 ; Cheng et al.,  2014 ). Thus, whether these biomarkers are clinically significant is debatable, and they require further validation in different populations (Cheng et al.,  2014 ). Therefore, once again, considering only the GCF cytokines is not better than considering only the microbiome, and an assessment of the two should provide a better indicator for the development of periodontitis. Nevertheless, comprehensive profiling is currently expensive and can only be done in a research context.
In this study, a significant association was detected between the microbiome and the GCF cytokines. There is a reciprocal genetic and epigenetic crosstalk between the microbiota and the host immune response (Levy et al.,  2015 ). Therefore, during the observed microbial shifts, cytokines, particularly IL-8 and CRP, might have a significant influence on the overall microbial community. As observed in this study and by Shojaee et al. ( 2013 ), the CRP levels are significantly higher in patients with periodontal disease compared to healthy subjects. The shift in CRP and other cytokines can be attributed to the shift in the composition of the microbial community affecting the inflammatory reaction in the host. Given the assembly of a heterotypic community by compatible organisms in a gingival crevice (Hajishengallis and Lamont,  2012 ; Hajishengallis,  2014 ), the microbiome may also significantly affect the cytokine levels, particularly for  Parvimonas micra  oral taxon 111,  Corynebacterium matruchotii  oral taxon 666,  Actinomyces  sp. oral taxon 525,  Fusobacterium nucleatum  oral taxon 420, and  Pseudomonas fluorescens  oral taxon 621. Therefore, rather than individual healthy- and/or pathogen-related microbes, whole ecological shifts (Abusleme et al.,  2013 ; Schwarzberg et al.,  2014 ), particularly the conversion of the community structure pattern and the correlation between cytokines and microbiomes, may be the major etiological mechanism underlying periodontitis, as suggested by the present study.
In the present study, α-diversity and community-level analyses (UniFrac-based PCoA) did not identify clear differences between the GCF from healthy individuals and that from individuals with periodontitis. One possible explanation is that all individuals in this study were from the same living area, which could result in non-significant differences of bacterial α-diversity between the healthy and the periodontitis groups due to the highly similar diet and life habits. Additionally, the major phyla were similar to those identified in previous studies (Griffen et al.,  2012 ; Abusleme et al.,  2013 ; Kirst et al.,  2015 ; Park et al.,  2015 ), which suggests that the common phyla in the GCF are relatively constant.
Nevertheless, this study is not without limitation. Indeed, the sample size was small and from a single geographical region. The samples were pooled. The cytokine analysis focused on 20 selected cytokines. Further investigation with a larger sample size distributed across a wide geographical area may be required for better understanding of the microbiome composition and its influence on cytokine composition in periodontitis patients. In addition, improvements in the high-flux quantitative detection of cytokines should enable expansive cytokinomics in the future to uncover additional underlying issues.
In conclusion, alterations in the polymicrobial community structure leads to disruption in the healthy correlation between cytokines and microbiomes. This dysbiosis between the microbiota and the immune response could be one of the major etiological mechanisms underlying periodontitis. These results provide a new link between microbiota and cytokines that will help developing strategies for the diagnosis, prognosis, and efficient monitoring of periodontal therapy.
