In this work, focusing on the most well-established SCC oncogene, TP63, we performed GSEA across three different types of SCC patient samples and unbiasedly identified fatty-acid metabolism as one of the key pathways regulated by this master TF (Fig.  1b ). This strong enrichment was not only validated by in vitro perturbation assays (Fig.  1e ), but also was highly SCC-specific in a pan-cancer analysis (Fig.  1c ). At the molecular level, sequence motif enrichment analysis identified SREBF1 as the key mediator bridging TP63 and fatty-acid metabolism in SCC (Fig.  1g ).
As a master regulator of both lipid and fatty-acid metabolism, the activity of SREBF1 is known to be under precise and intricate regulation. In addition to the feedback regulation by sterols, SREBF1 has been shown to be stabilized and activated by the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling cascade. Specifically, AKT stabilizes the SREBF1 nuclear form through downregulation of FBXW7, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which mediates SREBF1 N-terminus degradation 56 – 58 . Alternatively, mTORC1 regulates LIPIN1, a phosphatidic acid phosphatase, to control SREBF1 nuclear localization and its transcriptional activity 59 , 60 . Together, previous reports on SREBF1 regulation were largely focused on either its protein or post-translational levels, and the epigenomic regulation on SREBF1 has not been extensively investigated. Here, we first noted a prominent (high ranking) super-enhancer region for SREBF1 in SCC cells (Fig.  2a, b ). 4C and ChIP-Seq further determined that TP63, together with KLF5, regulated the transcription of SREBF1 by binding to its promoter and super-enhancer in SCC. Moreover, CRISPRi and luciferase reporter assays identified three enhancer constituents with strong activity to promote the transcription of SREBF1. These findings add another layer to the complex regulatory mechanisms on SREBF1. The epigenomic activation of SREBF1 in SCC cells indeed leads to its overexpression, as confirmed by our IHC staining of SCC patient samples. Moreover, we identified SREBF1 as an independent prognostic marker in SCC, consistent with prior reports in prostate, breast, and hepatocellular cancers 11 .
Functionally, our work first confirmed the canonical role of SREBF1 in the regulation of both lipid and fatty-acid metabolism. Specifically, LC-MS/MS-based lipidomics, RNA-Seq, and SREBF1 ChIP-Seq together established that SREBF1 directly targeted a number of rate-limiting enzymes for fatty-acid synthesis. This integrative approach further revealed that in addition to fatty-acid metabolism, SREBF1 also controlled the biosynthesis of SL and GPL in SCCs by regulating key enzymes in these processes. Of note, some of these SREBF1-regulated lipids, such as ceramides, have been shown to have prosurvival or antiapoptotic functions in certain cancer cells 61 , 62 . Importantly, in addition to its canonical function in lipid metabolic process, our study further established two more intriguing SCC-specific roles of SREBF1: (i) SREBF1, TP63, and KLF5 co-activate the transcription of each other, forming a feedback co-regulatory loop; (ii) SREBF1, TP63, and KLF5 cooperatively regulate the transcription of hundreds of genes specifically in SCC cells, activating cancer-associated signaling pathways such as ErbB and mTOR signaling cascades.
The feedback co-regulatory loop of SREBF1/TP63/KLF5 was initially discovered by CRISPRi experiments, which showed that inhibition of the super-enhancer for SREBF1 quite unexpectedly led to the reduction of expression of both TP63 and KLF5 (Fig.  3d ). Further in-depth examination revealed multiple SREBF1-binding peaks on both TP63 and KLF5 loci (Fig.  3f ), and luciferase reporter assays validated their regulation on these two TFs. Between SREBF1 and TP63/KLF5, we also observed a strong correlation at the mRNA level, but weak at the nuclear protein level. This weak correlation of the subcellular proteins is not entirely surprising, considering the complex activation and regulation of SREBF1 protein which involves three different subcellular compartments: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, and nucleus. Importantly, all of the three proteins were over-expressed in SCC primary samples and were associated with poor survival of SCC patients. These results resemble the “Core transcription regulatory circuitry (CRC)” paradigm, which have been found in many different cell types 63 – 65 , including both normal and cancerous cells. Interestingly, we recently demonstrated that SOX2/TP63/KLF5 constitute such CRC machinery in ESCC cells 33 . However, here we found that SOX2 and SREBF1 did not show co-regulation, indicating that different CRC models may be present in the same cell type, which has been increasingly recognized 65 , 66 .
The other SCC-specific function of SREBF1 uncovered in this work is its binding of ~500 genome loci uniquely in SCC cells. Indeed, genome-wide occupancy analyses showed that SREBF1-binding peaks were notably cell-type-specific (Fig.  6a ). Sequence motif analysis identified TP63/KLF5 as putative co-binding partners with SREBF1 on these ~500 ESCC-specific peaks, which was validated by ChIP-Seq data. RNA-Seq results confirmed the co-operative regulation of SREBF1/TP63/KLF5 on the transcription of the genes associated with these ESCC-specific peaks. More importantly, this cell-type-specific occupancy was associated with different biological functions compared with ubiquitous binding. For example, genes assigned to ubiquitous peaks were responsible for the canonical role of SREBF1 in lipid metabolism, whereas transcripts assigned to ESCC-specific peaks were enriched in many cancer-associated signaling pathways, including ErbB and mTOR pathways. Indeed, in-depth characterization identified 13 genes of these signaling pathways which were trio-occupied by SREBF1/TP63/KLF5 (Fig.  7c ). These genes included well-known cancer-promoting factors, such as EGFR, WNT9A, and MAP2K2.
In summary, this study identifies an important feedback co-regulatory loop of SREBF1/TP63/KLF5 in SCC cells. As a master regulator of lipid metabolism, SREBF1 controls the biosynthesis of fatty acids, SL, and GPL in SCCs. Moreover, SREBF1 shows a noncanonical, SCC-specific function by cooperating with TP63/KLF5 to regulate hundreds of  cis -regulatory elements across the SCC epigenome, which converge on activating cancer-promoting pathways. Both of the canonical and noncanonical functions of SREBF1 constitute the basis of its prominent biological significance in SCC. Indeed, SREBF1 is essential for SCC viability and migration. These results provide important mechanistic insights into the transcriptional dysregulation in cancer, and discover SREBF1 as a potential therapeutic target and prognosis marker for SCC.
