In the present study, we demonstrate for the first time that the anti-cancer effects of SMA  in vitro  and  in vivo  are mediated through increased activity of the β-catenin destruction complex. The increased activity of the β-catenin destruction complex induced by SMA was supported by an increase in axin levels as well as suppression of tankyrase activity and increased GSK3β activity resulting from suppression of PI3K/Akt activity. The increased axin levels and GSK3β activity led to the phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of β-catenin in SMA-treated cancer cells (HT29) as well as tumor tissues (A549 xenograft tumor tissues). Together with the results of the previous studies [ 25 , 26 ], our findings suggest that SMA is a possible candidate as a multi-target anti-cancer agent that could be applied in combination therapy with other anti-cancer agents for synergistic effects.
Because of the important roles played by the oncogenic mutation of  PIK3CA  in cancer cell survival, proliferation, metabolism, and motility [ 29 ], PI3K is considered a molecular target for anti-cancer drug discovery [ 30 ]. Similarly, dysregulation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway resulting in abnormal accumulation of β-catenin is associated with the pathogeneses and poor prognosis of both colon cancer and NSCLC [ 31 ]. Moreover, anti-cancer drug resistance in NSCLC is related to abnormal β-catenin [ 32 ]. Therefore, abnormal β-catenin signaling is also considered a target for cancer chemotherapy [ 33 ]. However, unlike PI3K/Akt inhibition by chemical compounds, direct inhibition of β-catenin signaling is difficult because β-catenin is regulated via many protein-protein interactions through the β-catenin destruction complex. The core components of the β-catenin destruction complex, which include APC, axin, CK1, and GSK3β, interact at extended protein-protein interfaces and are not considered viable molecular targets for drug development purposes. However, non-core tankyrase, an enzyme that causes degradation of axin which regulates GSK3β activity, has been viewed as a molecular target for anti-cancer drug development [ 17 ]. Suppression of HT29 colon cancer cells that harbor mutations in both the PI3K/Akt and Wnt/β-catenin pathways [ 34 – 36 ], requires dual-inhibitors for both pathways. Our present study showed that SMA fulfils anti-cancer agent criteria for inhibiting genetically heterogeneous cancers by inhibiting both PI3K/Akt and tankyrase, which is a regulatory component of GSK3β activity. Despite its low potency compared to XAV939, SMA showed a similar inhibitory effect on β-catenin-dependent TCF/LEF1 transcriptional activity. The results appear to be due to the dual inhibitory effects of SMA on PI3K/Akt and tankyrase, which results in a high level of GSK3β activation and nuclear localization of β-catenin. Furthermore, the present study also showed that A549 cells, which harbor mutant APC and wild-type β-catenin similar to HT29 cells, were more sensitive to SMA than HT29 cells. A549 cells express high levels of nuclear β-catenin, and this expression of nuclear β-catenin is reported to be strongly associated with a poor prognosis [ 37 ]. The differential effects of SMA on HT29 and A549 cells further support that SMA exerts a strong inhibitory action in nuclear β-catenin-dependent TCF/LEF1 transcriptional activity. However, there still is a possibility that SMA may directly inhibit nuclear translocation of β-catenin or binding of β-catenin to the TCF/LEF1 complex.
Our  in vivo  animal studies on CT26 syngenic and HT29 xenograft mouse models showed that the anti-tumor effect of SMA was dose-dependent and close to effect generated by 5-FU, which is the most commonly used cytotoxic anti-cancer drugs. However, 5-FU at 50 mg/kg daily causes significant side effects, such as hair loss and body weight reduction, whereas SMA did not cause such changes. Furthermore, we found combination treatment with 5-FU and SMA resulted in more potent anti-tumor activity than either drug alone without changing body weights, which suggests SMA could be used as an adjuvant therapeutic agent for CRC in combination with standard chemotherapy regimens. Cisplatin, which is most often used to treat NSCLC, has a number of associated side effects that limit its use. In particular, cisplatin nephrotoxicity, which is a major concern, is dose-related, and dose reductions are instituted when renal function is reduced. Our results show that SMA in combination with cisplatin synergistically increased anti-tumor activity in mice xenografted with A549 NSCLC without significant alteration in body weight ( S1 Fig ), which suggests SMA may be a valuable adjuvant therapeutic agent in combination with lower cisplatin doses. Additionally, similar to a previous report that silencing of β-catenin expression with siRNA inhibited drug resistance in A549 NSCLC [ 32 ], our present study showed a strong inhibitory action in nuclear β-catenin-dependent TCF/LEF1 transcriptional activity by SMA, also suggesting that SMA may be applied for cisplatin-resistant lung cancer. Our results also provide a basis for treating cancer stem cells that possess unlimited proliferative and self-renewal abilities and are resistant to chemotherapy [ 38 , 39 ]. Wnt/β-catenin signaling is critically involved in the maintenance of cancer stem cells in a variety of cancers including colon [ 40 ] and lung [ 32 ] cancers. Our current results showing SMA exerted a dose-dependent and strong inhibitory activity against β-catenin-dependent TCF/LEF1 transcriptional activity suggest SMA as an inhibitor against cancer stem cells.
In conclusion, our findings suggest SMA could function as a potential monotherapy or in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs, such as 5-FU or cisplatin. The molecular basis for the anti-tumor activity of SMA involves increased activity of the β-catenin destruction complex through the inhibition of tankyrase and PI3K/Akt pathway.
