There have been no reports in the English literature of multidisciplinary NF1 clinics conducting medical care in Asia including Japan. It is often difficult for NF1 patients to be treated in many departments each time because of the hospital system or the staff who can handle them. There are several reports of NF1 clinics in Western countries, especially pediatric NF1 clinics. A report from Northern Ireland described the treatment of NF1 patients under the age of 16 years with an average of 4.6 years 18 . In Australia, the average age at consultation is 5 years and the male–female ratio is 1.05:1 19 .
Setting up an NF1 clinic for adults is more difficult than for children. In Australia, at the age of 18, individuals with NF1 must be transitioned to the adult health care system, for most adults with NF1 patients being treated by general practitioners who are in charge of referrals to specialists. However, most general medical practitioners have no training in the management of NF1. In a recent Australian study, most adult NF1 patients have not undergone regular disease monitoring since the transition from pediatrics to adulthood, and importantly, some adult NF1 patients developed new complications in adulthood, such as spinal-related medical conditions and chronic pain 20 . There was a report of an adult NF1 clinic in Canada, where the average age of patients was 32.6 years 21 . This report states that among adult NF1 patients, only 9% were referred from pediatric centers that were seeing NF1, suggesting the difficulty in transition to adult NF1 care. This study also found that there are six other adult NF1 clinics worldwide reported, two in the United States 22 ,  23 , 2 Australian facilities 19 ,  24 , 1 Brazilian facility 25 , and 1 French facility 26 . Of these, only one facility sees only adult NF1 patients 23 , while the others treat adults together with children. In the present study, the transition was considered to be successful in our hospital, as almost all patients could continue to be treated by the multidisciplinary team excluding pediatricians after the age of 16. However, it seems that the reason why the number of patients up to teenagers is large in our hospital might be that parents take the initiative to send their NF1 children to our NF1 clinic. The decrease in the number of NF1 patients over the age of 20 years may be a problem in Adolescence and Young Adult generation 27 . In addition, the decrease in the number of male NF1 patients between the ages of 20 and 39 is considered to affect the difference in the number of male and female NF1 patients in the present study.
Even if an adult consults the NF1 clinic, it is important to decide how intensely he/she needs to be treated. Due to the wide clinical spectrum expressed in NF1 patients, it is difficult to determine appropriate levels for adult monitoring and the infrequent occurrence of most complications 28 . Age-specific monitoring of symptoms and education of patients are important in managing NF1 patients. Adults with severe or complex symptoms need to attend an NF1 clinic, but adult NF1 patients with only mild symptoms need to know when to seek medical advice 29 . Symptoms such as rapid expansion of existing tumors, chronic pain, and neurological deficits require immediate medical attention and prompt examination and treatment 5 ,  13 ,  20 ,  29 . Personal education and support in self-management is important in the care of long-term NF1-related disorders 30 . An important matter in self-care is to activate the consciousness of the patient 31 , which means that NF1 individuals are ready to take action to manage their healthcare 32 . Increasing the level of interest improves health-related outcomes 31 ,  33 . Annual clinical surveillance is recommended for all NF1 individuals, however, there is evidence that some adults do not comply with these guidelines 7 ,  20 . Taken all together, in our hospital, we explain the importance of regular visits to patients with adult NF1 and have them understand the signs of suspected development of MPNST. We believe that it is important for them to be aware of such symptoms and to have them visit our hospital as soon as they notice them.
NF1 has been selected as one of 333 designated intractable diseases in Japan (Designated intractable disease No. 34) ( https://www.nanbyou.or.jp/entry/3991 ). When the severity exceeds a certain level, the specified medical expenses subsidy system is applied based on the Intractable Diseases Law in Japan. However, many doctors are not familiar with the designated intractable disease system, and so some NF1 patients do not receive medical assistance appropriately. In that sense, it is also important to consolidate NF1 patients in our hospital and give them the opportunity to benefit from medical assistance appropriately. Since registry system has not been completely established in Japan yet, it is unknown how many NF1 patients there actually are. If the efforts of NF1 clinics like our hospital spread all over Japan and NF1 clinics can be established in each region, with the establishment of a registry system, accurate epidemiological data of NF1 patients will become available in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic has greatly affected the medical field. NF1 clinical care in the United States has also been greatly affected. A study by Radtke et al. indicated that about two thirds of the NF1 clinics reported a greater than 50% decrease in the number of available patient appointments, and modified clinical surveillance and research protocols 34 . In Japan as well, the decrease in the number of examinees delays the detection of disease, and results in a decrease in medical income. However, even under such circumstances, the number of patients who visited our in-hospital NF1 clinic increased in 2020. This may be because of the strong interest in this first such NF1 clinic in Japan and differences in the influence of the pandemic between the United States and Japan.
As an initiative of All Japan, the Japanese Society of Recklinghausen Disease has set up a medical care network at multiple facilities in Japan with the aim of consolidating NF1 medical care ( http://plaza.umin.ac.jp/~jsrd/network/index.html ). In addition, the society is actively conducting academic activities with the aim of equalizing NF1 medical care in Japan. These are very meaningful activities for NF1 patients and their families. However, since the number of doctors and facilities that can specialize in NF1 medical care listed on the academic society network is still small, patients and their families may need to travel long distances to receive medical treatment from these specialists. It is necessary to increase the number of NF1 clinics in Japan so that comprehensive NF1 medical care can be performed in a single facility like our hospital.
There are several limitations in our report. First of all, it may not be possible to extract all the information from the medical record, and the incidence of each disease (scoliosis, deep-seated neurofibromatosis, etc.) may be higher. Second, because the orthopedic oncologist has created a list and a record of NF1 patients who have been treated on the medical care network, it is possible that NF1 patients who have not been treated by an orthopedic oncologist are missing from the list. However, we request that all NF1 patients treated in related departments be referred to orthopedics. Third, the data may contain a selection bias, as initially severely symptomatic NF1 patients were referred to this NF1 clinic. However, recently, the number of patients, who are referred when they are diagnosed with NF1 or when Café au lait spots are observed at birth, is increasing, and so it may become like population based data in the future. Fourth, in this research, we cannot provide scientific information at present. However, in the future, it will be possible to use this registry to accumulate data such as whole body MRI that is prospectively imaged to detect deep-seated plexiform neurofibroma, and send out scientific data. Finally, this clinical care does not include nurses that specialize in NF1 practice, and will be necessary in the near future.
