PILCs are a unique histological subtype of ILCs. They tend to have higher grade, more nuclear pleomorphism, single nucleolus, and increased proliferation compared to classic ILCs. They also seem to be molecularly divergent with increased proportion of tumors overexpressing HER2/neu and c-myc and having loss of p53 which are not typically seen in ILCs. Based on IHC assessment, the majority of classical ILCs tend to fall in the luminal A subtype (grade I, ER+/PR+/HER2–ve with a low Ki67). However, PILCs tend to have more of a luminal B IHC picture (grades I-III, ER+/PR+/-/HER2-/+, Ki67-high). Clinicopathological characteristics suggest that they would have a more clinically aggressive behavior, but studies in the literature have conflicting results with regard to prognosis. Given the unique histology, we sought to further assess and characterize some of the molecular features which could be distinct between the two groups. We evaluated the tumors for expression of markers for cell proliferation, cell cycle, and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway activation.
Activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway has been associated with endocrine and cytotoxic therapy resistance in breast cancer with the majority of them occurring in hormone receptor (HR) positive tumors [ 16 ]. There is preclinical and clinical evidence supporting that the activation of this pathway is involved in resistance to endocrine therapy in HR-positive breast tumors [ 17 ]. Endocrine resistance by this pathway activation is likely mediated through multiple mechanisms including stimulation of proliferation or survival pathway or downregulation and loss of HRs. It is now known that PIK3CA is mutationally activated in up to 40% of ER alpha-positive tumors; PTEN levels are decreased in a similar proportion, and AKT2 (up to 5%) and p70S6K (10-20%) may also be overexpressed by amplification in some breast tumors [ 13 ]. The ER-positive tumors were found to have the highest frequency of mutations in the catalytic subunit of PI3K (P13KCA); however, the presence of PIK3CA mutations in ER-positive tumors was not associated with increased phosphorylation of Akt, pS6K, and 4EBP1, which are markers of activation of the PI3K pathway [ 13 ]. Moreover, these mutations have not correlated with worse prognosis in endocrine-treated breast cancer [ 13 ,  18 ]. On the other hand, PTEN, a negative regulator of the PI3K pathway, activates downstream Akt/mTOR signaling and may contribute to endocrine resistance [ 19 ]. Cowden's syndrome, a result of germ-line mutation in PTEN gene, has a predisposition of breast and other cancers [ 20 ]. Sporadic PTEN mutations are rare but have been reported in breast cancer [ 21 ,  22 ]. Even more commonly, there is an allelic imbalance of PTEN, and the PTEN protein is absent or decreased in higher number of breast cancers. Typically lost in ER-negative breast cancer, PTEN protein is decreased in more than 50% of ER+ breast cancer [ 19 ]. Subtle downregulation of PTEN by only 20% has been shown to increase tumor invasive potential in mouse models [ 23 ]. This pathway can be activated by other mechanisms in addition to PTEN loss (like growth factor signaling, mutations, and tumor microenvironment). Currently, there are no established standard biomarkers to detect activation of this pathway. PI3K/Akt activation pathway gene signatures have been reported to predict response, but none are clinically validated for treatment decision making [ 18 ]. We evaluated expression of PTEN and pS6K as markers of this pathway activation in our study in an attempt to study protein expression as a biomarker for this pathway.
Our results indicated PILCs are clinicopathologically more aggressive than ILCs with similar phenotypes. They tend to have higher Ki67 and higher 21-gene assay recurrence score. In addition to prognosis, the 21-gene recurrence score assay is also used clinically to predict benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy. Our results indicated that chemotherapy might be beneficial in PILCs. This is in contrast to the common thinking that ILCs are not chemosensitive. Despite small numbers of PILCs tested by this assay (10), only 2 tumors were in the low range (<18). Also, the 21-gene recurrence score assay was performed on 6 ILCs which had a higher grade (similar to PILCs); however, the majority of them (4/6) were in the low range. These results suggest that biologically PILCs are likely more aggressive than ILCs.
One of the signaling pathway mechanisms known to be activated in biologically aggressive tumors is cell proliferation, cell cycling, and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. We sought out to test for these pathways by IHC and RNA expression analysis.
IHC staining and comparison of Ki67 does confirm our hypothesis that there is more activation of proliferation pathways in the PILCs compared to ILCs. We also noted that PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is activated de novo in PILC subgroup compared to ILCs as demonstrated by increased expression of pS6K1 in PILC tumors. Further, we found that PTEN is not the primary regulator of the pathway in our sample set. Other activation mechanisms seem to play a role in these tumors and need to be investigated further. We sought to analyze other causes of activation by looking at gene expression analysis of activators of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway but were unable to determine a significant difference between the groups. One of the major reasons is the sample size, and the number of genes analyzed (770 genes in the Nanostring nCounter analysis) is relatively small compared to published gene expression analysis. In addition, it is important to remember that PILC is a subgroup of ILC, and an overlap of certain genes/pathways is expected. Also, attempting to find a distinction by analyzing a small sample set is difficult, and all results (positive or negative) have to be interpreted with caution.
