We report a proteo-genomic evaluation of aberrant protein targets in 260 primary tumors from two HBV-related HCC cohorts ( Figure 1 ). Tumor-normal and inter-tumor analyses of protein expression data highlighted multiple aberrantly-expressed protein targets in key signaling pathways, including PDGFRB, CDK6, ERBB2, and EGFR ( Figures 2 ,  3 ) whose protein overexpression in HCC tumors are also validated by IHC data from the Human Pathology Atlas ( Figure S7 ). By integrating mutation, mRNA expression, and protein expression data, our proteogenomic analyses determined whether the overexpressed protein targets were concordant with genomic evidence or arose without genomic or transcriptomic alterations ( Figure 4 ). Finally, the therapeutic viability of the identified targets was evaluated by analyzing drug screen data in human cell lines, implicating proteins whose up-regulation correlate with treatment response ( Figure 5 ). These series of analyses have identified a list of prominent targets in HCC-Gao/-Jiang cohorts and the HCC-Caruso study ( Supplementary Tables 1, 2 ).
Genome-based precision oncology in HCC poses a challenge where potentially targetable driver alterations are only identified in less than 30% of the patients ( 33 ). Proteomic analyses enabled us to identify new potentially targetable overexpressed proteins that may correspond to limited driver alterations, such as PDGFRB, ERBB2/3, EGFR and FGFR4 kinases upregulated in HCC tumors arising from no genomic driver alterations, as well as the non-kinase proteins such as MFAP5, HMCN1, EGFL7 and FHL1. Possible therapies for the overexpressed kinases include CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors, such as Palbociclib, which has been shown effective in human liver cancer cell lines and mouse models with intact tumor suppressor Retinoblastoma (Rb1) ( 34 ). ERBB2 could also be explored as a potential target in HCC, as evidence supports its involvement in liver tumorigenesis and intravenous injection of HER2-inhibitor Trastuzumab limited HCC growth  in vivo ( 
 35 ). Similarly, ERBB3 is overexpressed in hepatitis B-associated HCC, which are sensitive to ERBB3 inhibition ( 36 ). Erlotinib, an EGFR inhibitor, has been shown to be effective in patients treated with Lenvatinib as they upregulate EGFR, further supporting the role of EGFR as a biomarker ( 37 ).
By using human HCC cell lines that represent the heterogeneity observed in HCC patients, we evaluated the potential therapeutic efficacy of targets identified in primary tumors and showed protein expression of selected targets can predict treatment response. In particular, we found that the expression of FGFR4 kinase were significantly associated with drug response and may be a useful biomarker for FGFR4 inhibitors in addition to the currently-used FGF19 expression ( 31 ,  32 ). In addition, we observed a trend of improved recurrence-free survival in the HCC-Gao patients that did not overexpress FGFR4 protein compared to those overexpressing FGFR4 (p = 0.087; FGFR4-not-overexpressed median survival 23.2 months; FGFR4-overexpressed median survival 9.5 months) ( Figure S8 ), although the association did not reach statistical significance and require validation in future larger-scale cohorts. Given the partial success of FGFR4 inhibitors in HCC patients, additional FGFR4 inhibitors have been developed and are under evaluation ( 38 ). Furthermore, tumors with elevated Hsp protein expression and MTOR phosphorylation may be more vulnerable to Hsp90 inhibitors and mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin; other studies have also suggested that MTOR phosphorylation may be a better biomarker for mTOR inhibitors than genetic alterations in PTEN or TSC1/TSC2 ( 39 ).
In this study, the profiled primary HCC tumors collected in human cohorts are all related to HBV infection. This might pose a limitation as our findings may represent the HBV-specific features underlying the HBV-related HCC. Expanding the generalizability of the targets identified herein requires further investigation using the HCC cases related to different primary causes. The proteomic analyses of patient cohorts herein rely on global MS data, which can be time- and resource-intensive to generate in a clinical setting. Once the relevant protein markers are identified in these discovery studies, development of targeted assays using antibody-based (ex. IHC) or targeted MS technologies (ex. selected reaction monitoring) would be required.
To conclude, by employing a multi-omics approach, we investigated protein-level aberrations showing limited DNA or RNA level alterations in two human HCC cohorts and identified potential therapeutic targets showing expression-driven dependency upon targeting inhibitory treatment in human HCC cell lines; FGFR4 kinase and Hsp proteins, lacking actionable mutations, may be targetable in a fraction of HCC as supported by the vulnerability exposed by their respective targeting inhibitors. We believe that integrating proteomics data represents an unprecedented opportunity for the discovery of effective drug targets that may not be readily observed by genomic analyses in HCC and other cancer types.
