In this study, we found that androgen is capable of inducing promoter activity of  GNMT  through the AR signalling pathway. Our data showed that the mRNA level of GNMT in LNCaP PCa cells was induced by androgen agonist-R1881 in a time- and concentration-dependent manner ( Figure 1 ). Although we showed that R1881 can induce GNMT expression at early as 8 h post-treatment, the kinetics of  GNMT  induction by AR needs further investigation. Nonetheless, our finding suggests  GNMT  is a target gene of AR.
Human cancer cells often display abnormal DNA methylation patterns [ 21 ]. Aberrant hypermethylation of the promoter region can result in the silencing of tumour suppressor genes; several tumours (including PCas) display genome-wide hypomethylation that promotes chromosomal instability [ 22 , 23 ]. SAM is a naturally occurring compound whose roles in many biochemical processes are well documented. The SAM methyl group can be transferred to numerous substrates (e.g., DNA, histone and glycine), and SAM can be converted to SAH, a potent inhibitor of many SAM-dependent methyltransferases except GNMT [ 24 ]. Therefore GNMT has been considered to play an important role in maintaining a constant SAM/SAH ratio by transferring methyl groups to glycine to form sarcosine [ 25 ]. Since androgen agonist can induce  GNMT  gene expression, androgen-induced GNMT expression may affect DNA methylation and chromosome stability, thereby contributing to PCa tumorigenesis.
According to the results of EMSA and ChIP assay, AR binds directly to ARE5 located at +19/+33 of exon 1 ( Figures 5 ). Previously, Sreekumar et al. used ChIP-sequencing assay to show that the AR-binding site of  GNMT  is located in the promoter region flanking the transcription start site [ 12 ]. In this study, we used a −1812/+14 luciferase reporter construct that contains the site described by Sreekumar et al. to evaluate AR-mediated induction of GNMT gene expression. However, we failed to confirm their results. We did not find significant increase of luciferase activity after R1881 treatment (results not shown). Instead, our reporter assay, EMSA and ChIP data indicate the ARE is located at +19/+33 of exon 1 coding region.
In addition to acting via intracellular AR-mediated pathway, androgens can also bypass AR-associated action and induce conventional second messenger signal transduction cascades that are considered non-genomic [ 26 ]. Further studies needed to elucidate this non-genomic effect of androgens and its relationship with GNMT-related pathogenesis of cancer.
It is important to note that in this study, we found a motif at +1118/+1126 in the intron 1 of  GNMT  can bind YY1 both  in vitro  and  in vivo  ( Figure 4 ). Overexpression of YY1 has been detected by using immunohistochemical staining in a large series of PCa and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia tissues [ 27 ]. In addition, microarray analysis revealed that YY1 is up-regulated in HCC [ 28 ]. Since the motif that we identified for the YY1 binding is associated with transcriptional repression [ 29 ], we speculate that overexpression of YY1 may be involved in the down-regulation of  GNMT  in HCC and PCa. It has been reported that YY1 can co-regulate transcriptional activity with NF-Y (nuclear factor-Y) via separate YY1 and NF-Y binding sites [ 30 ]. Alternatively, YY1 can interact with NF-Y to enhance promoter activity [ 31 ]. In addition, YY1 also regulates the transcriptional activity of AR [ 32 ]. Therefore YY1 maybe play an important role in regulating  GNMT  expression in a regular or AR-induced manner.
It has been reported that activation of the PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)-PKB (protein kinase B (also called Akt) pathway promotes AR ubiquitylation and leads to AR degradation via a proteasome-dependent pathway [ 33 ]. Previously, we identified DEPDC6/DEPTOR [(DEP domain-containing mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin)-interacting protein)] as a novel GNMT-interacting protein [ 34 ]. Peterson et al. identified that DEPTOR interacts with mTOR directly and serves as an mTOR inhibitor. Overexpression of DEPTOR activates Akt via the inhibition of a negative feedback loop from S6K (S6 kinase) to PI3K [ 35 ]. We showed that GNMT can neutralize DEPTOR's effect on Akt activation [ 34 ]. Therefore there might be a feedback regulation between androgen and GNMT. Further study is needed to elucidate the consequences of such complicated interaction in the pathogenesis of PCa and HCC.
GNMT is a susceptibility gene for both HCC and prostatic cancer [ 36 , 11 ]. It has been reported that liver tumour tissues have significantly higher levels of AR than tumour-adjacent tissues [ 37 – 39 ]. As a major risk factor associated with HCC in males, HBV (hepatitis B virus) has been attributed to elevated androgen levels and enhanced AR-mediated activity in the host. Chiu et al. found that HBV X protein enhances AR-responsive gene expression in an androgen level-dependent manner [ 40 ]. Our present results suggest that  GNMT  is a direct AR target gene in PCa, we suspect that AR signalling may also play an important role in GNMT regulation in liver cancer. Vitamin A and its derivatives are known to induce hepatic GNMT and DNA hypomethylation in rats [ 41 , 42 ]. Recently, we found that HBV can activate GNMT gene expression (unpublished results). Therefore HBV and androgens may induce GNMT expression cooperatively and trigger cellular senescence and liver regeneration, which initiate the tumorigenesis of HCC. Further research is required to clarify the mechanisms involved.
In conclusion, we found that GNMT is an AR-targeted gene with its functional ARE located at +19/+33 of the first exon in this study. These results are valuable for the study of the influence of androgen on the gene expression of GNMT especially in the pathogenesis of PCa and HCC.
