We analyzed the mortality data from the Veneto region in Northern Italy to investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on COPD-related mortality. The long-term downward trend in mortality, as assessed by the MCOD analysis, was radically modified. In 2020 there was an abrupt increase in mortality compared to the previous years, which was not reflected by figures based on the UCOD. The analysis of monthly mortality rates confirmed the excess of COPD-related mortality during the first and the second epidemic waves. The study confirms that standard mortality statistics relying on the UCOD can result in biased estimates of long-term trends due to changes in coding rules over time and do not allow to properly account for the actual excess mortality during the pandemic due to COVID-19 acting as a competing cause. 
The present study confirms the presence of a long-term pre-pandemic decline in mortality from COPD, with a more favorable trend for men. A 2.56% annual decrease in mortality from COPD between 1994 and 2010 was registered among men in the European Union. This decline was limited to 0.76% in women, with rates even increasing or remaining unchanged in many countries. Consequently, the historical gender gap in COPD mortality tended to decrease, possibly due to diverging trends in smoking habits [ 1 ] and to a greater susceptibility in women to secondhand smoke and non-smoking-related factors [ 3 ]. Previous peaks in COPD-related mortality were registered in winter seasons characterized by a higher circulation of influenza viruses [ 27 ] and severe cold spells [ 28 ], as observed in the Veneto region in 2012 within an overall favorable epidemiological scenario ( Figure 1 ). However, based on MCOD analyses, the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic was characterized by an unprecedented rise in COPD-related mortality.
The MCOD analysis also allowed some insights into the changing comorbidity patterns. From 2008–2012 to 2013–2017, the proportion of death certificates with COPD reporting diabetes or neoplasms remained unchanged, whereas those reporting ischemic heart or cerebrovascular diseases declined ( Table 2 ). A reduction over time in the proportion of cardiovascular deaths among patients with COPD has already been reported in England [ 29 ]; it must be noted that tobacco is a risk factor for both COPD and cardiovascular diseases, and trends in mortality related to COPD also depend on prevention and appropriate treatment of comorbidities [ 2 ].
To date, only sparse data on mortality from COPD during the pandemic’s first year are available, and these are exclusively based on analyses of the UCOD. In the US, the age-standardized mortality rates from chronic lower respiratory diseases (COPD + asthma) decreased by 4.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. However, this finding was heavily influenced by ethnicity, with a larger decline among non-Hispanic Whites than among Hispanics, whereas in non-Hispanic Blacks, rates increased [ 21 ]. In Spain, the number of deaths from COPD has decreased from 12,815 in 2019 to 11,786 in 2020, with a corresponding drop in proportional mortality from 3.1% to 2.4%. This finding was due to COVID-19 displacing distribution and the ranking of the leading underlying causes of death [ 22 ]. In Scotland and Wales, mortality from COPD through 2020 has continued the decreasing trend observed before the pandemic [ 18 ]. In Norway, few deaths due to COVID-19 were registered during the first pandemic wave; meanwhile, deaths from COPD consistently dropped, probably due to the reduction in respiratory infections linked with social distancing, the use of personal protective equipment, and improved hand hygiene [ 30 ]. In the preliminary data referring to the first epidemic wave in Italy, the increase in COPD mortality was limited to the most affected region (Lombardy), possibly associated with undiagnosed COVID-19 cases in an overwhelmed health system at the beginning of the pandemic [ 31 ].
In the Veneto region, the excess of COPD-related mortality observed in 2020 by means of the MCOD approach was between 14% (when 2018–2019 was used as a reference) and 16% (when compared to the 2008–2019 time series). After a reduction in observed deaths in January–February, probably due to low flu activity, peaks in the number of deaths with a mention of COPD strictly mirrored the COVID-19 epidemic waves affecting the region, the first in spring 2020 and a much larger one starting in autumn 2020. The same time pattern has already been reported for mortality from circulatory and neurological diseases [ 26 , 32 ]. By adopting a similar methodology, the excess mortality estimated for other chronic conditions, such as Parkinson’s disease, in Veneto during 2020 was even larger [ 26 ]. Despite the potential beneficial effect of a limited circulation of other respiratory pathogens, the present data demonstrate that patients with COPD represent a population suffering from increased mortality during the COVID-19 epidemic waves. This is also supported by the consistent proportion (above 7%) of the deaths attributed to COVID-19 with COPD mentioned in the certificate. When both diseases are reported as concurrent causes of death, COVID-19 is preferred as the underlying cause over COPD. In fact, UCOD monthly mortality for COPD across 2020 showed only a slight peak corresponding to the first pandemic wave, and no peaks could be observed in the following months. Underreporting of COVID-19 is likely to be responsible for this small peak; during the second pandemic wave, with a complete reporting of COVID-19, no increase in COPD as the UCOD could be observed.
It must be noted that patients with COPD are often affected by other comorbidities that cause them to be frailer. In fact, a recent study suggested that the increase in mortality could be an indirect effect mainly mediated by the presence of concomitant diseases in COPD patients rather than due to COPD itself [ 33 ]. Nevertheless, evidence suggests that patients with COPD are at higher risk of developing more severe forms of COVID-19 as well as dying from COVID-19. A recent systematic review reported risks of adverse outcomes such as hospitalizations and admission to the intensive care unit being significantly increased among COPD patients and mortality risks being more than doubled than those of non-COPD patients [ 34 ]. 
The main study limitation is represented by the accuracy of death certificates, which are known to be affected by a large underreporting of COPD. Population-based cohort studies with long-term mortality follow-up of individuals with a spirometry-based diagnosis of COPD showed how only a minority of decedents had any mention of the disease in their death certificate, especially in the less severe stages of COPD [ 6 , 35 ]. Furthermore, it is estimated that in adults aged 40 years or older with evidence of persistent airflow limitation on spirometry, only 20–30% have been diagnosed with COPD [ 36 ]. The MCOD approach can only partially address the issue of underreporting COPD; however, it is robust to changes in the coding rules and more suitable for assessing time trends [ 26 ]. In fact, with the adoption of the IRIS software, the selection of COPD as the UCOD has increased. COPD is more frequently regarded as an obvious cause of infectious diseases (e.g., sepsis, pneumonia), whereas it is no longer considered a consequence of specific cardiovascular diseases, resulting in an overall 19% increase in COPD as the UCOD when using the new classification system [ 25 ]. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 as a cause of death in 2020 added further intricacies to the interpretation of standard mortality statistics. Conversely, the MCOD analysis allowed for a complete assessment of the pandemic’s impact on pre-existing long-term mortality trends. 
