Chronic kidney disease (CKD) has emerged as a severe public health problem, with a global prevalence of 8–16% [ 1 ]. Regardless of its etiology, renal fibrosis tends to be the eventual pathological outcome of CKD and is characterized by excessive extracellular matrix deposition [ 2 ,  3 ]. However, effective means to ameliorate or even reverse renal fibrosis remain scarce. Therefore, it is of great clinical significance to develop a treatment for renal fibrosis.
The kidney is one of the most metabolically active organs and requires a large amount of energy to maintain its normal physiological structure and function. When supplied with adequate oxygen, the majority of cells generate energy through the aerobic oxidation of glucose. Only in the absence of oxygen, cells produce energy and large amounts of lactate through anaerobic glycolysis. Conversely, most tumor cells rely primarily on glycolysis for energy even in the presence of adequate oxygen, which is referred to as “aerobic glycolysis” or the “Warburg effect” [ 4 ,  5 ]. Although aerobic glycolysis was originally discovered in tumor cells, it is now increasingly recognized as an important pathogenic process in renal fibrosis. More importantly, abnormalities in glucose metabolism promote the progression of renal fibrosis [ 6 ,  7 ]. Therefore, altering the pattern of metabolism may be a novel strategy to prevent renal fibrosis.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been developed as a prospective treatment option for CKD due to their trophic, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects [ 8 – 10 ]. However, there are numerous challenges for their clinical application, including safety, tumorigenesis and immunosuppression [ 11 ]. Exosomes are a type of extracellular vesicles (EVs) with a size range of 50 to 150 nm in diameter that are secreted by almost all kinds of cells, [ 12 ] and they shuttle a variety of molecules, including proteins, lipids, DNA, mRNA and microRNAs (miRNAs), from parental cells to other cells to regulate intercellular communication [ 13 ,  14 ]. MSC-Exos are endowed with several advantages over MSCs, such as higher safety, lower immunogenicity and avoidance of tumor formation [ 15 ]. Thus, MSC-Exos have the potential to be an alternative to MSC-based therapy. Recently, studies have reported that MSC-Exos inhibit glycolysis in certain diseases. For instance, MSC-Exos inhibit glycolysis in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells and promote oxidative phosphorylation in a model of pulmonary arterial hypertension [ 16 ]. In addition, MSC-Exos suppress glycolysis in alveolar macrophages, thereby mitigating lipopolysaccharide-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome [ 17 ]. Whether MSC-Exos relieve renal fibrosis through the mitigation of glycolysis and the potential mechanisms involved remain elusive.
In the present study, we demonstrated that MSC-Exos alleviated renal fibrosis by attenuating glycolysis in TECs. Mechanistically, we found that the expression of miR-21a-5p was significantly elevated after MSC-Exos treatment and that PFKM acted as a downstream target of miR-21a-5p in the regulation of glycolysis. Altogether, our results demonstrated a correlation among MSC-Exos, glycolysis and renal fibrosis, and we further explored the potential molecular mechanisms. Our findings revealed a novel role of MSC-Exos in inhibiting glycolysis, thereby providing new insight into renal fibrosis therapy.
