5-FU or oral fluoropyrimidines are widely used in the treatment of cancer, especially gastrointestinal tumors and breast cancer. Their efficacy is widely recognized, both in monotherapy and in combination with other drugs; however, their administration produces severe toxicity in 10–40% of patients and even lethality in 0.5–1% [ 2 ]. Severe toxicity is particularly related to partial or complete deficiency of the DPD enzyme activity, which leads to a lower clearance rate and a longer half-life of 5-FU [ 3 ,  6 ]. It is estimated that between 0.01 and 0.5% of Caucasian individuals have a complete deficiency of the enzyme activity, and 3–8% have a partial deficiency. The high interindividual variability in the activity of DPD is mainly due to polymorphic variants in the  DPYD  gene [ 25 ].
Although 5-FU has been used for 60 years and knowledge of DPD activity dates back almost three decades, only recently has the genotyping of  DPYD  polymorphisms before using dihydropyrimidines in clinical practice been established. This consensus of experts, put together jointly by the SEOM and the SEFF, is intended to convey that, in the current era of personalized medicine, it is highly recommended to genotype  DPYD  polymorphisms before administering fluoropyrimidines. Following the recommendations made by the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee of the EMA, it is advisable to screen for at least the following  DPYD  mutations that have clinically validated effects: (1) c.1679T>G ( DPYD *13, p.I560S); (2) c.1905 + 1G>A ( DPYD *2A); (3) c.2846 A>T (p.D949V); and (4) c.1236 G>A (c.1129–5923 C>G, HapB3) [ 10 ].
The genotyping of  DPYD  classifies individuals as normal, intermediate, or poor metabolizers. Normal metabolizers do not require changes in the initial dose, intermediate metabolizers should start treatment with fluoropyrimidines at doses reduced to 50%, and poor metabolizers are contraindicated for fluoropyrimidines, and other therapeutic options must be therefore considered.
The determination of the  DPYD  genotype before treatment with dihydropyrimidines offers advantages such as avoiding early toxicity that may be lethal and the deterioration of quality of life caused by toxicity. In addition, health care costs related to toxicity may be reduced, and it has been shown that  DPYD  genotyping is cost-effective. Even so, not all cases of severe toxicity are predictable by genotyping the four recommended variants. This highlights the need to expand the investigation to cover other variants of  DPYD  and other genes, to determine which techniques are the most appropriate for their genotyping, and which other factors may influence fluoropyrimidine toxicity.
