Schizophrenia is a complex disabling disorder, genetic and environmental factors are involved in its etiology. DISC1 [ 43 ,  44 ] and 22q11.2 microdeletion [ 45 ,  46 ] are established genetic factors of schizophrenia. Intra-uterine environment impairment induced by prenatal infection or malnutrition [ 3 ,  5 ] is included in non-genetic factors. Animal studies show that exposure to environmental insults in utero leads to altered response to stress postnatally, which results in abnormal brain development and behavior [ 47 ,  48 ], but the mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we found that the leading cause of FGR-induced schizophrenia was the significant upregulation of NRG1 in mPFC, which impaired PV interneuron GABAergic maturation and resulted in subsequent schizophrenia behaviors in mice.
PV interneuron plays a key role in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia [ 21 ,  22 ]. Studies propose two possible mechanisms that may explain the role of PV interneurons in schizophrenia. First, deficits of PV interneurons lead to disinhibition of pyramidal neurons, and results in hyperactivity and cognition decline in schizophrenia patients [ 49 ]. Second, PV interneuron plays a critical role in cortical gamma-band synchrony, and the dysfunction of PV interneurons leads to logic reasoning impairment and working memory deficits [ 50 ]. In this study, we found that FGR led to cognition decline, attention deficits, and executive function impairment, which was in accord with the cortical disinhibition symptoms of schizophrenia patients. The dysfunction of PV interneurons in mPFC leads to significant cortical disinhibition, which may result in hyperactivity, social ability deficiency, and sensorimotor gating deficits. Meanwhile, PV interneuron impairment may cause the dysfunction of pyramidal neurons and hence lead to memory impairment.
NRG1 is a fundamental gene in the maturation of GABAergic interneurons. NRG1 knockout in mouse MGE region leads to significant GABAergic dysfunction in mice model. Our results indicate that the GABAergic maturation of PV interneuron, which is critical in cortical disinhibition, is significantly impaired in FGR mouse mPFC. Improving the GABAergic maturation of PV interneurons through NRG1 knockdown in mPFC significantly rescued the schizophrenia behaviors in FGR mice. Recent studies have found increased NRG1 signaling in the PFC of schizophrenia patients, which stimulates GABA transmission [ 51 ]. This leads to hypofunction of the glutamatergic pathway, reduced glutamatergic transmission, and plasticity in the brains of patients with schizophrenia [ 52 ,  53 ]. In our study, we found that FGR resulted in reduced expression of GAD1 and PV in mouse mPFC, which could be rescued by NRG1 knockdown. As NRG1 regulates GABAergic transmission, it is possible that the upregulation of NRG1 compensates for reduced GAD1 and PV activity. This is the first time that the specific brain region and cellular target of FGR-induced schizophrenia are determined.
Antipsychotics like clozapine and risperidone are effective against positive symptoms, while the hematological and metabolic side effects occur frequently [ 54 ,  55 ]. Meanwhile, FGR leads to metabolic diseases including heart disease [ 56 ], diabetes [ 57 ] and insulin resistance [ 58 ]. The side effects of psychotropic drugs may aggravate the process of metabolic diseases induced by FGR. Besides, antipsychotic drugs could hardly relieve negative symptoms and cognition decline in schizophrenia patients. In this study, we found that mPFC NRG1 knockdown rescued cognition decline, social novelty defects and sensorimotor gating impairment in FGR mice without hematological and metabolic side effects. This treatment is probably an important supplement for existing antipsychotics for FGR-induced schizophrenia patients.
Collectively, our study provides direct evidence that NRG1 is a critical molecule that bridges PV interneuron GABAergic maturation and schizophrenia behaviors in offspring with FGR. Besides, we determine that mPFC is the main brain region in FGR-induced schizophrenia. We propose that mPFC NRG1 knockdown could be a suitable therapy for alleviating schizophrenia behaviors in FGR.
