Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic and devastating lung disease of unknown etiology 1 . IPF is usually characterized by exertional dyspnea and decline in lung function, only with a median survival time of 3 years from the time of diagnosis 2 , 3 . Currently, two drugs approved by the FDA, such as pirfenidone and nintedanib, have been considered promising therapeutic agents for slowing down the progression of the disease, mainly by changing forced vital capacity (FVC) 4 , 5 . Unfortunately, these drugs have some serious potential side effects and neither of these drugs have been found to effectively reverse lung fibrosis 5 , 6 . Thus, there is an urgent need to develop novel drugs for the treatment of IPF.
The hallmark of IPF is a chronic alveolar epithelial injury, which results in fibroblast activation, myoblast proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, thereby destroying lung architecture 7 , 8 . A plethora of mediators, including cytokines and chemokines, have been implicated in the process of lung fibrosis. Among these molecules, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 is one of the most potent inducers of fibrosis pathogenesis. This growth factor markedly induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) and triggers the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts 7 . Further, TGF-β1 can directly activate several signaling cascades, including canonical Smad-dependent and non-canonical Smad-independent signaling, which subsequently aggravate pathological changes in IPF 7 , 9 . Therefore, inhibition of TGF-β1 signaling may be a promising therapeutic approach in IPF.
PM014 is a novel herb extract derived from the herbal compound Chung-Sang-Bo-Ha-Tang (CSBHT), which has been widely used for treating lung disorders in traditional medicine 10 . Recently, we found that PM014 suppressed the inflammatory response in radiotherapy-induced pulmonary inflammation by regulating inflammasome activation 11 . PM014 was also documented to inhibit LPS-induced lung neutrophilia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 12 . Furthermore, PM014 has been demonstrated to alleviate allergic airway inflammation and smooth muscle hypertrophy in asthma 13 .
Considering the anti-inflammatory potential of PM014 in lung diseases, we hypothesize that PM014 protects against IPF. To test this hypothesis, we induced lung fibrosis with bleomycin treatment on mice  in vivo  and also induced EMT with TGF-β1 treatment on A549 cells as well as human lung fibroblasts (HLFs)  in vitro . We found that administration of PM014 provided the protection for mice against lung fibrosis as evidenced by reduced pulmonary fibrosis and improved lung damage. Further mechanistic studies revealed that PM014 not only repressed TGF-β1-induced EMT and fibroblast activation, but also inhibited TGF-β1 signaling pathway. Our data indicate that a novel herbal extract PM014 could be therapeutic target for treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.
