Study design
The research objective was to define and characterize the endothelial subpopulation(s) that form lesions in CCM using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology. As previously described ( Bravi et al., 2015 ;  Malinverno et al., 2019 ) we have extensive experience with the P8 neonatal CCM mouse model, upon which the sample sizes were estimated here. ScRNA-seq was performed on littermates, with two mice per conditions. A total of 32,261 cells were sequenced with good quality reads. Visium spatial transcriptomics was performed on littermates, with two mice per condition, one section per mouse. uPAR staining and  Bst1  RNA-scope were performed on littermates, with three mice per condition. All of the other experiments were performed twice with different litters and for n ≥ 6 (see details in Figure legends). No data inclusion or exclusion criteria were predefined or applied. No outliers were defined or excluded. Given the early time points before weaning and sexual maturity, no attempt was made to distinguish or segregate the data based on gender. Injection of tamoxifen was performed 1 day after birth without knowledge of the genotypes.
Statistical analysis
Unless differently specified, statistical analysis was performed as follow using GraphPad Prism 8. The data were tested for normality using Shapiro-Wilk tests. The data showing normal distributions were analyzed using unpaired t-tests or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by  post-hoc  analysis (Tukey’s or Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests), as specified in the relevant Figure legends. Nonparametric data were analyzed using Mann-Whitney tests. For each experiment, the number of samples is indicated in the relevant Figure legends or in the corresponding Material and Methods section. More detailed information can be found in  Supplementary file 9 .
Murine models
The following mouse strains were used for immunofluorescence analysis:  Cdh5 (PAC)-Cre-ER T2 / f/f Ccm3  mice in which  f/f Ccm3  mice with exons 4–5 of the  Pdcd10 (Ccm3)  gene flanked by loxP sites (Taconic Artemis GmbH) were bred with  Cdh5 (PAC)-Cre-ER T2  mice to obtain endothelial-specific and tamoxifen-inducible loss of function of the  Pdcd10  ( Ccm3)  gene, as previously described ( Bravi et al., 2015 ). The Cdh5(PAC)-Cre-ER T2  mouse line was kindly provided by R.H. Adams (Department of Tissue Morphogenesis, Faculty of Medicine, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine University of Münster, Münster, Germany) ( Wang et al., 2010 ). The genotype of the  Pdcd10  ( Ccm3)  ko mice was  f/f ; Cdh5 Ccm3 (PAC)-Cre-ER T2 +.  Pdcd10  ( Ccm3)  wt mice were  f/f ; Cdh5 Ccm3 (PAC)-Cre-ER T2 -.
The following mouse strains were used for scRNA-seq and Visium spatial transcriptomics:  Cdh5 (PAC)-Cre-ER T2 / f/f Ccm3 / Cldn5 (BAC)-GFP mice were generated by crossing  Cdh5 (PAC)-Cre-ER T2 / f/f Ccm3  mice with the  Cldn5 (BAC)-GFP (Tg( Cldn5 -GFP)Cbet/U) reporter mice (kindly provided by C. Betsholtz; Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden) to obtain endothelial-specific expression of GFP ( Honkura et al., 2018 ). The genotype of the  Pdcd10  ( Ccm3)  ko mice was  f/f ; Cdh5(PAC)- Ccm3 Cre-ER T2 +;  Cldn5 (BAC)-GFP+.  Pdcd10  ( Ccm3)  wt mice were  f/f ; Cdh5(PAC)- Ccm3 Cre-ER T2 -;  Cldn5 (BAC)-GFP+.
The mice were all bred on and back-crossed into the C57BL/6 background.
Tamoxifen treatment
Tamoxifen was dissolved in 10% ethanol-sunflower oil (10 mg/mL) and administered to the mice to induce Cre activity and genetic modifications. In all of the experiments, mouse pups received a single intragastric injection of 100 μg tamoxifen at P1(23, 34), and the tissues were harvested at P8. Two mice of the  Pdcd10-wt  and two mice of the  Pdcd10-ko  from the same litter were used for the single cell datasets. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size.
The experimental animal protocols were approved by the Uppsala Ethical Committee on Animal Research (permit number C145/15) and the Italian Ministry of Health. Animal procedures were performed in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and in compliance with the guidelines established in the Principles of Laboratory Animal Care (directive 86/609/EEC).
Brain endothelial single-cell isolation
The brains of  Pdcd10-ko  and  Pdcd10-wt  mice were collected and the olfactory bulbs were removed. The brain single cell isolation was performed following the manufacturer's instructions for Adult Brain Dissociation kits (Miltenyi Biotech, 130-107-677). In brief, the brain tissues were first mechanically and enzymatically dissociated using gentleMACS Octo Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotech), then myelin, cell debris, and erythrocytes were removed. ECs were enriched by depletion of CD45-positive cells using CD45 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotech, #130-052-301) and selection of CD31-positive cells using CD31 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotech, #130-097-418). Then, the collected brain endothelial single cells were processed for scRNA-seq.
Single-cell library preparation, sequencing and data pre-processing
The scRNA-seq libraries were prepared using the 10× Genomics Chromium system (10× Genomics), following the manufacturer instructions for the Single Cell 3’ Reagent kits v2 (10× Genomics, #PN-120237). A total of 10,000 cells were targeted for capture from each mouse sample. Subsequently, the libraries were pooled and sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 system (Illumina) with an aimed depth of 50,000 reads per cell. The raw data were processed using the analysis pipeline Cell Ranger (10× Genomics, 2.1.0 version) for sample demultiplexing, barcode processing, reads alignment to mouse reference genome (mm10) and single-cell 3′ gene counting.
Single-cell RNA-seq data analysis

           Integrated analysis 
           Butler et al., 2018 ;  Stuart et al., 2019 ) was used to further analyze the pre-processed data from the Cell Ranger pipeline. The quality controls were performed after first merging the data by sample genotype. Cells with detected genes outside of 2 standard deviations (±2 SD) of all of the detected genes were filtered out, and cells with >5% mitochondrial counts were filtered out. The gene expression data of  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  were first log normalized to a scale factor of 10,000 and then regressed on the total number of molecules detected per cell (nUMI) using the ScaleData function. Then, variable genes were identified using the FindVariableFeatures function based on the variance stabilizing transformation method. Afterward, the  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  data were merged for the integrated analysis. In the integrated analysis, anchors with pairwise correspondence between individual cells of two genotypes were first identified using the FindIntegrationAnchors function. Then the merged data were scaled and used for principal component analysis. For the clustering analysis, 30 principal components (PCs) were used as the input to a graph-based clustering function in Seurat, FindClusters. The resolution parameter for FindClusters, which determined the number of returned clusters, was decided based on how the samples moved as the number of clusters increased, using the R package clustree ( Zappia and Oshlack, 2018 ). Finally, UMAP, a non-linear dimensionality reduction method, was used to visualize and explore cells and clusters in the dataset ( Figure 1D  and  Figure 1—figure supplement 3 ). To identify canonical marker genes that were conserved across genotypes and define the clusters, FindConservedMarkers function was used. To identify the DEGs between genotypes or selected groups, the FindMarkers function was used. The R package Seurat (v.3.1) ( 
        

           Cell-type annotation of clusters 
           Supplementary file 1 ). Then the number of key genes that were included in the canonical marker gene list of each cluster was analyzed ( Supplementary file 7 ; avg_logFC > 0 and minimump_p_val < 0.05). A cluster was annotated by a cell type if this cluster had ≥50% key genes of this cell type as the canonical cluster marker genes. To assign putative cell type identities to clusters, a list of key genes that define different endothelial subpopulations were collected based on previous publications ( 
        

           Selection and evaluation of clustering resolution 
           Zappia and Oshlack, 2018 ) was used to visualize the relationships between clusters at multiple levels of resolution in a clustering tree ( Figure 1—figure supplement 3 ). The selection of the resolution was based on the identification of stable and over-clustered regions in the clustering tree. A stable region was defined as a range of resolution where no additional sub-branching took place in between, and where the total number of clusters remained constant. An over-clustered region normally began with low in-proportion edges, with new clusters then forming from multiple parent clusters. Finally, the highest resolution that remained in a stable and not over-clustered region was selected to form the clusters. A set of resolution parameters that ranged from 0.01 to 1 was used to generate different numbers of clusters at the clustering step during the integrated analysis. R package clustree ( 
           Figure 1—figure supplement 4 ). The lower the resolution when two lineages branched, the higher the chance that the derived clusters were different. To further evaluate how likely the clusters generated from the selected resolution that was actually present in the dataset, we overlaid the prevalent cell type identity information of the clusters onto the cluster tree ( 
        

           Comparative analysis 
           Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  were defined with a cut-off of adjusted p-values<0.05 ( Supplementary file 8 ; p_val_adj < 0.05). The statistical summaries of the DEGs in each cluster were visualized graphically ( Figure 2A ). The regulation of  Klf2  and  Klf4  between  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  were indicated by log-fold changes, as illustrated in the plots ( Figure 2B ). The differences in the regulation of CCM lesion genes, BBB-related genes, and mitotic, tip cell and tumor tip cell markers are shown as heatmaps ( Figures 2C,G ,  4C  and  5B,C ), in which the log-fold changes in gene expression levels between  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  are shown. The DEGs between  
        

           Over-representation analysis 
           Chen et al., 2013 ;  Kuleshov et al., 2016 ) ( https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/ ) (a gene set enrichment analysis web server), was used to investigate the enrichment of CCM-related genes in the significantly up-regulated genes (up-DEGs;  Supplementary file 8 ; padj <0.05) in  Pdcd10-ko  comparing with  Pdcd10-wt  in each cluster. Enrichment analysis was performed using EnrichR and its Rare Diseases GeneRIF ( Mitchell et al., 2003 ) library. This library summarizes the rare diseases related genes into gene sets based on their GeneRIF (Gene Reference Into Function) annotation from NCBI. For each cluster, the number of DEGs that specifically overlapped the ‘cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM)’ gene set is summarized in  supplementary file 3  and shown graphically ( Figure 2D ). The ‘cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM)’ gene set size is reported at the top of the chart. The EnrichR web server ( 
           Liberzon et al., 2015 ;  Subramanian et al., 2005 ) ( https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/annotate.jsp ) was used for over-representation analysis. The significantly up-regulated or down-regulated genes ( Supplementary file 8 , average |logFC| ≥ 0.3 and padj <0.05) between  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  in each cluster were analyzed for enriched gene sets in the collection ‘Hallmark’ from MSigDB (v7.0). The significantly enriched gene sets (p<0.05, q > 0.25, odds of overlapped genes to genes in the gene-set ≥4, overlapped genes > 2) are shown graphically ( Figure 2E ). The tool ‘compute overlaps’ from web application GSEA ( 
        

           Cluster 8 analysis 
           Supplementary file 7 ) were considered unique if they were identified as canonical marker genes only for C8 and fulfilled the following criteria (Specificity): adjusted p-value (p_val_adj)<0.05 and average logFC (avg_logFC)>0.25. Unique canonical marker genes. The canonical marker genes of cluster 8 (C8;  
           http://www.informatics.jax.org/ ) and NIH National Library of Medicine (PubMed,  https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ) databases. The keywords used for the PubMed search were ‘gene/protein name/s’ (as in Mouse Genome Informatics) and ‘endothelial cells’. If the search gave no results only the ‘gene/protein name/s’ was used. References for the functional annotations summarized in  Figure 3  are reported in  Supplementary file 5  and  6 . Unique canonical marker gene annotation. The unique canonical marker genes of C8 were manually annotated using the Mouse Genome Informatics ( 
           Pdcd10-ko  vs. wt). The significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between  Pdcd10-ko  and wt in each cluster were identified using FindMarkers function from Seurat R package with a cutoff of adjusted p-values<0.05 and average |logFC| > 0.2. If the significant DEGs were only identified in cluster eight and not in any other clusters, they were considered as unique DEGs for cluster 8. Unique DEGs ( 
        

           Cell population distribution by genotype 
           Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  in each cluster was analyzed and illustrated graphically ( Figure 4A ). Statistical analysis of the confidence interval was performed using cell ratios from all of the clusters. The dashed line in the line plot indicates the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval (CI) in the dataset. A cell ratio above the upper limit means that the proportion of  Pdcd10 -ko cells in this cluster was much larger compared to that of the other clusters. The cell ratio between  
           Mki67 ,  Plk1 ,  Mxd3 ,  Birc5 , and  Ube2  were used for selection of the different mitotic cell populations. Then for each mitotic cell population, the cell ratios between  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  in each cluster were analyzed and used for confidence interval analysis, as described above ( Figure 4B ). Mitotic cells. The expression levels (>0) of mitotic markers  
           Plaur ,  Apln , and  Mmrm2  were used for selecting the different tip cell populations. Then, in each tip cell population, the cell ratio between  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  in each cluster was analyzed and used for confidence interval analysis, as described above ( Figure 5A ). Tip cells. The expression levels (>0) of tip cell markers  
           Bst1, Peg3, Cd200, and Procr  in all the cells were calculated respectively. Then the first quartile (Q1) of each marker was used for selection of the corresponding progenitor cell population (expression >Q1). The proportion of progenitor cell populations in either  Pdcd10-wt  or  Pdcd10-ko  of each cluster is shown graphically ( Figure 7D ). Progenitor cells. The expression level quartiles of progenitor markers  
        
Trajectory analysis
STREAM ( Chen et al., 2019 ) is an interactive pipeline for reconstructing developmental trajectories from single-cell data, and it was used here to reorder the cells along the lesion developmental lineages. The normalized expression data from cells in clusters 1, 6, 7, and nine that were calculated in Seurat were passed directly into STREAM.
STREAM performed three main steps to infer a trajectory structure: selection of informative genes, dimensionality reduction, and simultaneous tree structure learning and fitting using ElPiGraph. The structure of the trajectory was plotted in three-dimensional tree views ( Figure 6—figure supplement 1A,B ) and 2D flat tree views ( Figure 6A,B ), where the branches are represented as straight lines and each circle represents a single cell. The lengths of the branches and the distances between the cells and their assigned branches are preserved from the space where trajectories were inferred.
To identify DEGs among different cell populations in the trajectory, the FindMarkers function in Seurat was applied and significant DEGs were selected using the following criteria: adjusted p-value (pValAdj) <0.05 and average log-fold change (|Avg LogFC|)>0.25. The GO enrichment analysis of significant DEGs was performed using EnrichR, the enriched GO terms were screened by satisfying an adjusted p-value<0.05.
The expression level quartiles of the progenitor markers,  Bst1, Peg3, Cd200, and Procr , in all the cells included in the trajectory analysis were calculated respectively. Then the first quartile (Q1) of each marker was used for selection of the corresponding progenitor cell population (expression >Q1). The proportion of progenitor cell populations in either  Pdcd10-wt  or  Pdcd10-ko  of each trajectory branch is shown graphically ( Figure 6E ).
The mitotic progenitor populations were further selected based on the expression levels (>0) of a mitotic marker Mki67 in the progenitor cell populations (expression >Q1,  Figure 6E ). The number of mitotic progenitor cells in either  Pdcd10-wt  or  Pdcd10-ko  of each trajectory branch were shown graphically ( Figure 6F ).
Immunofluorescence
All immunostaining of both the control and mutant samples was carried out simultaneously and under the same conditions. Tissues were prepared and processed for immunohistochemical analysis as described previously ( Bravi et al., 2015 ;  Corada et al., 2013 ). Briefly, mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of Avertin 20 mg/kg (Sigma, T48402), and perfused with 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).
The mouse brains were carefully dissected out from the skull and post-fixed overnight by immersion in 4% PFA at 4°C. The next day, they were washed in PBS and processed for sectioning as follows. Brains were embedded in 3% low-melting-point agarose, sectioned with a vibratome (100 mm thickness; VT1200s; Leica), and immune stained. Sagittal vibratome sections were incubated in PBST solution (PBS with 0.3% Triton X-100) supplemented with 5% donkey serum and containing the primary antibodies, overnight at 4°C. This was followed by over-day washes with PBST and then the secondary antibody solutions, overnight at 4°C. Sections were then washed over-day, post-fixed for 2 min in 1% PFA, and mounted in Vectashield that contained DAPI (H-1200; Vector). Detection of Claudin-5, Zo1, and Cingulin was carried out as above, with the only exception that brains were post-fixed overnight in 100% methanol at 4°C (instead of 4% PFA) and rehydrated for 1 hr in PBS before sectioning.
The mouse eyes were collected and fixed in 4% PFA in PBS for 2 hr at 4°C. Retinas were dissected as described previously ( Corada et al., 2013 ) and incubated at 4°C overnight in primary antibodies diluted in PBSTC buffer (PBS with 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.1 mM CaCl 2 ) supplemented with 5% donkey serum, followed by the suitable species-specific Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibody staining, overnight at 4°C.
Antibodies
The following antibodies were used: anti-CD93 (R and D, AF1696, 1:500); anti-Erg (Abcam, Ab92513, 1:400); anti-Ki67 (Invitrogen, 14-5698-82, 1:200); anti-Podocalyxin (R and D, AF1556, 1:400); anti-CoupTFII (LSBio, LS-C356225, 1:200); anti-PECAM-1 (BD, 55370, 1:200 or Millipore, MAB1398z, 1:500); anti-Claudin-5 (Invitrogen, 352588, 1:200); anti-VE-cadherin (BD, 550548, 1:200); and anti-Cingulin (Invitrogen, 36–4401, 1:500). Alexa Fluor 488, 555 and 647 donkey secondary antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch (1:400). Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated donkey anti-mouse was used to detect murine IgG (1:400, Jackson ImmunoResearch). The anti-uPAR antibody was kindly donated by Francesco Blasi, FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology Foundation (IFOM), Milan, Italy ( Tjwa et al., 2009 ).
Image acquisition, processing and analysis
Confocal microscopy was performed using confocal microscopes (SP8, Leica). For image analysis, the Fiji software was used (open source,  http://fiji.sc/ ). The Figures were assembled and processed using Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator. The only adjustments used in the preparation of the Figures were for brightness and contrast. For comparison purposes, different sample images of the same antigen were acquired under constant acquisition settings.
IgG intensity was measured as follows. Each mouse brain sagittal section was acquired under 10 × microscopy. Then, using ImageJ, six regions of interest (ROI) were defined (three in the cortex, one in the hippocampus, one in the cerebellum). The ROI size for the hippocampus and cerebellum were defined to roughly cover 80% of the area of the region. The mean intensities of each ROI were measured. The size and the relative position of the ROIs were kept constant across each comparison. Two sections for each sample were used for quantification.
Quantification of the Ki-67 EC nuclei was carried out as follows. For each confocal stack acquired, the ERG-positive nuclei were first counted using the three-dimensional object counter plugin ( Bolte and Cordelières, 2006 ) for ImageJ. ERG staining was then used to create a binary mask of the EC nuclei. Ki-67 stacks were then multiplied by the corresponding binary mask to isolate the EC-specific nuclei. Finally, Ki-67 positive nuclei were counted using the three-dimensional object counter plugin for ImageJ, and the ratio of Ki-67 positive/ERG positive nuclei was calculated. The outline of the ERG-positive nuclei in the binary mask is shown in  Figure 4D  (middle panels, purple) in combination with the original ERG staining (middle panels, green). For visualization purposes, the results of EC filtered Ki-67 are shown in the lower panels of  Figure 4D  (light blue) in combination with PECAM-1 counterstaining.
The uPAR staining intensity was quantified as follows. For each confocal stack acquired, Podocalyxin staining was used to create a binary mask of the ECs and vessels. Then, uPAR stacks were multiplied by the corresponding binary mask to isolate EC vascular-specific staining, preserving the pixel intensity. The pixel mean intensity was then measured on the filtered stacks.
Quantification of tip cells was carried out by two separate operators. The first operator acquired the confocal stacks, and the second operator manually counted tip cells in the brain, tip and tip-like cells in the retina, and filopodia/tip cells in a blind test. Cell counting was through the cell counter plugin of ImageJ.
The radial expansion in the retina was measured as the mean distance covered by the vessels growing from the optic nerve.
Spatial transcriptomics library preparation and sequencing
  and  Pdcd10-wt  mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of Avertin 20 mg/kg (Sigma, T48402), and perfused with ice-cold Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) for 3 min. The brains were carefully dissected out from the skulls and snap-frozen using chilled isopentane in a dry-ice bath (according to the suggested protocols for tissue sample collection for Visium; 10× Genomics, Pleasanton, CA, USA). Fresh-frozen brain samples were then embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature (TissueTek Sakura). Coronal 10-μm-thick cryosections of cerebellum were prepared at −20°C using a cryostat (CryoStar NX50; Thermo Scientific). Quality of the tissue was confirmed with in-situ hybridization using the RNAscope technique, with 3-plex positive controls (ACD, Newark, CA, USA; #320881; for detecting Polr2a, PPIB, UBC mRNA) and 3-plex negative controls (ACD, #320871; for detecting DapB mRNA of  Bacillus subtilis ), according to the protocol described below. Mouse brain samples with good morphology and expressing mRNA of the housekeeping genes throughout the tissue sections were considered as good quality samples.
Fresh-frozen brain samples (n = 2, per genotype) derived from  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  mice were chosen for the analysis with the Visium spatial transcriptomics. Here, 10-μm-thick coronal sections were placed on chilled Visium Spatial Gene Expression slides (#PN-2000233, 10× Genomics). Tissue sections were then fixed in chilled methanol and stained with hematoxylin and eosin according to the Visium Spatial Gene Expression user guide (CG000239 Rev A, 10 × Genomics). Brightfield hematoxylin and eosin images were acquired using brightfield and fluorescent microscopy (DMi8; Leica) at 10 × magnification, and exported as TIFF files. After imaging, the tissue sections on the slides were permeabilized for 16 min, which was selected as the optimal time based on tissue optimization time-course experiments (Visium Tissue Optimization Slides and reagents, #PN-1000193, 10× Genomics) ran prior to the gene expression analysis, following the manufacture instructions.
On-slide cDNA synthesis, tissue removal, probe cleavage, and final library preparation were performed according to the Visium Spatial Gene Expression user guide (CG000239 Rev A, 10 × Genomics). The cDNA and post-library construction quantification were analyzed by running 1 μL samples on High Sensitivity RNA ScreenTape (4200 TapeStation system; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Libraries were sequenced (NovaSeq 6000 system; Illumina), with an estimated sequencing depth of 50,000 reads per tissue spot.
Spatial transcriptomics data analysis
The raw sequencing data and histology images were first processed using the analysis pipeline Space Ranger (v1.0, 10× Genomics) for sample demultiplexing, barcode processing, reads alignment to mouse reference genome (mm10), single-cell 3′ gene counting per spot, and clustering and placing spots in spatial context on the slide image.
Loupe cell browser (v 4.0, 10× Genomics) was used to further explore the clustering results from the Space Ranger pipeline. The number of clusters for each tissue slide was determined based on the anatomical region of the brain ( Goldowitz and Hamre, 1998 ) and using the Allen Brain Atlas ( http://atlas.brain-map.org/ ) as reference ( Figure 4—figure supplement 1A ). EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 , and  Pecam1  (expression >0.5) ( Figure 4F ,  Figure 4—figure supplement 1B  and  Figure 5—figure supplement 1A , yellow). Proliferating EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 ,  Pecam1  (expression >0.5), and  Mki67  (expression >1) ( Figure 4F , light blue). Proliferating lesion EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 ,  Pecam1 ,  Klf4 ,  Klf2 ,  Ly6a ,  Thbd  (expression >0.5), and  Mki67  (expression >1) ( Figure 4F , light green). tip cell EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 ,  Pecam1 ,  Apln , and  Plaur  (expression >0.5) ( Figure 5—figure supplement 1A and B , light blue). tip cell lesion EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 ,  Pecam1 ,  Klf4 ,  Klf2 ,  Ly6a ,  Thbd ,  Apln , and  Plaur  (expression >0.5) ( Figure 5—figure supplement 1A and B , light green). Proliferating tip cell EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 ,  Pecam1 ,  Apln ,  Plaur  (expression >0.5), and  Mki67  (expression >1). Proliferating tip cell lesion EC spots were defined as those co-expressing  Cldn5 ,  Cdh5 ,  Pecam1 ,  Klf4 ,  Klf2 ,  Ly6a ,  Thbd ,  Apln ,  Plaur  (expression >0.5), and  Mki67  (expression >1). The Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze whether the proportions of proliferating spots are different between endothelial and lesion endothelial spots, or between tip cell endothelial or tip cell lesion endothelial spots in  Pdcd10-ko  samples. The total spots count from both  Pdcd10-ko  samples were merged and used for the Fisher’s exact test.
The R package Seurat (v.3.1) was used to perform integrated analysis of the spatial transcriptomic data. Similar to joined scRNA-seq data analysis, data from all of the slices were normalized and merged. Then merged data were used for dimensional reduction and clustering. The gene expression levels in all of the spots were overlaid on tissue staining images to visualize the spatial location of the selected spots.
In-situ hybridization using the RNAscope technique
In-situ hybridization using the RNAscope technique was performed according to the manufacturer instruction (Advanced Cell Diagnostics [ACD]), using multiplex fluorescent Reagent Kit v2. Briefly, fresh-frozen brain samples derived from  Pdcd10-wt  and  Pdcd10-ko  mice were prepared as described above. Then 10-μm-thick coronal cryosections were pretreated with H 2 O 2 , followed by a 15 min incubation with protease IV. The probes  Cldn5  (ACD, #491611-C2) and  Bst1  (ACD, #559841-C3) and the 3-plex negative and positive controls were hybridized on the tissue sections for 2 hr at 40°C (HybEZ oven; ACD), followed by signal amplification with the reagents included in Reagent Kit v2. The signal was detected with TSA plus fluorescein cyanine 3 (for  Cldn5 ) and cyanine 5 (for  Bst1 ; all dyes from Akoya Bioscience Inc, Marlborough, MA, USA), and tissue sections were counterstained with DAPI (ACD). Fluorescent tilescan images that visualized the signals for the mRNA expression were acquired using a fluorescent microscope (DMi8; Leica) at 20 × magnification. Representative close-up images were then acquired with the confocal microscope at 20 × and 40 × magnification. For comparison purposes, different sample images of the same probe combinations were acquired under constant acquisition settings.
