Endothelial cells (ECs) are a particularly heterogenous cell population, as they have distinct structural, phenotypic, and functional properties ( Kalucka et al., 2020 ;  Vanlandewijck et al., 2018 ). Recent studies have shown that ECs of arteries, veins, and the lymphatic system show high degrees of specialization in their responses to specific hemodynamic and functional requirements ( Augustin and Koh, 2017 ). Compared to large-vessel endothelia, this adaptation of microvascular ECs is seen by their expression of highly specialized properties, in terms of their responses to the specific requirements of different organs. Thus, an improved understanding of the molecular basis of this EC heterogeneity will help toward the definition of organ function under physiological and pathological conditions.
The cells that form the microcirculation of the brain represent a typical example of highly specialized microvascular ECs. The main important functions of these vessels relate to the regulation of cerebral blood flow and oxygen delivery, and the supply of energy metabolites to the nerve cells. Dysfunction of the brain vascular system can cause major problems for brain connectivity, synaptic activity, and information processing ( Zhao et al., 2015 ). The specialized function of the brain microcirculation requires coordinated and continuous cross-talk between ECs and the other cell types, to thus establish what is known as the ‘neurovascular unit’ ( Zhao et al., 2015 ). ECs are surrounded and embraced by pericytes and they are in contact with the glia (i.e. astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia) and neurons ( Armulik et al., 2010 ). The ECs in these neurovascular units form the blood–brain barrier (BBB), which strictly controls the entry of neurotoxic plasma components, circulating inflammatory cells, and pathogens into the brain tissue ( Iadecola, 2017 ).
As well as their control of general vascular permeability, the cells of the BBB promote the passage of nutrients and other essential molecules from the blood into the brain through their expression of multiple highly specialized transport systems ( Zhao et al., 2015 ). Thus, the integrity of the BBB is regulated through coordinated and continuous interactions of the ECs with the surrounding neural cells, pericytes, and fibroblasts, which form a favorable environment for the ECs to develop and express their specialized properties.
Several genetic pathologies that can cause alterations in the development and function of the BBB arise as a result of inactivation of specific genes in the cells of the neurovascular units. While these diseases are relatively rare, they can help us to identify the key mechanisms that underlie the formation of the BBB and the acquisition of its specialized properties. A typical example here is the genetic disease known as cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM) ( Clatterbuck, 2001 ). CCM vascular lesions, or cavernomas, mostly develop in the central nervous system and the retina. These can frequently bleed, which leads to epileptic seizures, focal neurological deficits, and other neurological problems, such as hemorrhagic stroke ( Clatterbuck, 2001 ;  Labauge et al., 2007 ;  Rigamonti et al., 1988 ;  Wong et al., 2000 ).
CCMs occur in both familial and sporadic forms. The familial form of CCM has an overall prevalence of less than 1:10,000. It is characterized by multiple CCM lesions that increase in number and size through the life of the patient, which results in recurrent cerebral hemorrhage. Familial CCM is due to loss-of-function mutations in any one of the three genes known as  KRIT1  (or  CCM1 ),  CCM2  (or  OSM ), and  PDCD10  (or  CCM3 ). These three types of CCM loss-of-function mutations show comparable morphology and specific brain localization. Instead, the sporadic form of CCM has relatively high prevalence, of about 1:200, and in the majority of cases, it occurs as a single cavernoma. Sporadic CCM can also result in a relatively variable set of symptoms, which are similar to familial CCM and depend on the location of the cavernoma ( Labauge et al., 2007 ;  Akers et al., 2017 ;  Cavalcanti et al., 2012 ).
At present, to limit disease progression, there remains the need for an effective pharmacological treatment for patients with CCM, as to date, the only curative therapy is lesion eradication by surgical intervention or stereotactic radiosurgery. Open skull surgery is currently applied to selected symptomatic lesions only, as it is highly invasive, and it can result in significant complications, while being accompanied by unproven long-term benefit. Also, in familial CCM, neither surgery nor radiotherapy can cure multiple lesions throughout the brain and spinal cord. Therefore, despite many studies into CCM, an effective pharmacological therapy for this disease is still missing ( Abdelilah-Seyfried et al., 2020 ).
An important step toward the understanding of CCM and any potential therapy is the identification of the EC populations that trigger and sustain the development of these vascular malformations. Here, we have used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to map the transcriptional diversity of ECs in vascular cavernomas, with specific focus on  PDCD10 . Using this system, we identified distinct EC clusters and we define their functional roles in the development and progression of CCM.
