In the gastrointestinal tract, CFTs are usually discovered incidentally; however, they can also manifest as ulcers if involving the stomach or with bowel obstruction when present in the small intestine. Abdominal or epigastric pain is another common presenting complaint. Grossly, gastrointestinal CFTs are submucosal and range in size from 0.5 to 11.0 cm, with an average size of 2.6 cm. 4  They are often well-demarcated, unencapsulated, spherical to lobulated masses with a firm to hard, tan-white to gray cut surfaces.
Microscopically, CFT comprises a paucicellular fibroblastic proliferation with bland spindle cells embedded in dense collagenous tissue, variable degree of lymphocytes, and scattered dystrophic or psammomatous calcification. The differential diagnosis includes inflammatory myofibroblast tumor (IMT), leiomyoma, IgG4-related disease, fibromatosis, desmoplastic fibroblastoma, fibroma of the tendon sheath, low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma, and gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). 5 

CFTs can be histologically very similar to IMT (specifically sclerosing type) as both entities are paucicellular with dense fibrous stroma and can have lymphocytic infiltrate. The two entities can be differentiated by the presence of ALK gene rearrangements or ALK-1 immunohistochemical stain positivity in IMT; however, it is noteworthy that only ~50% of IMTs are positive for ALK. Additionally, IMTs are frequently SMA positive and show variable expression of desmin.
The cytological features of leiomyoma are sufficient to differentiate it from CFT; however, leiomyomas can also be paucicellular and hyalinized. In these cases, desmin, SMA, and caldesmon can help the distinction.
CFTs may contain IgG4 plasma cells, but it can be distinguished from IgG4-related disease, which depicts dense storiform fibrosis, obliterative phlebitis, and a much higher number of IgG4 positive plasma cells.
Grossly, fibromatosis is poorly circumscribed and microscopically has sweeping fascicles of elongated spindle cells. Additionally, it lacks prominent inflammation and calcifications and frequently shows nuclear positivity with beta-catenin stain. Both desmoplastic fibroblastoma and fibroma of the tendon sheath lack the distinctive inflammation and calcification that are found in CFTs.
Low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma usually occurs in the proximal extremities and trunk. It classically shows hypocellular fibrocollagenous and cellular myxoid zones and diffuse, strong MUC4 positivity.
GISTs are generally more cellular and lack inflammation, hyalinized collagen, and calcifications. They are frequently positive for CD117 and DOG1, which are negative in CFT.
Mehrad et al. 6  performed whole-exome sequencing on three specimens of pleural calcifying fibrous tumors and found mutations in ZN717, FRG1, and CDC27 genes. They also identified copy number losses on 8 chromosomes and a large loss common to all cases on chromosome 6.
Management of CFTs depends on the location and treatment of the symptoms. They are considered benign and cured by local resection of the tumor. 4  Recurrence is known to occur. In a study by Nascimento et al. 7  local recurrence rate was 20%. Malignant transformation has not been reported in the literature, and the overall prognosis is excellent regardless of the anatomical location. 5 

