BIRC5 is an effective drug target for cancer therapy due to its high expression in tumors, but not in normal tissues. BIRC5 was highly expressed in high grade serous ovarian carcinoma compared with ovarian, fallopian tube epithelia, and peritoneal fluid based on a large number of cancer patients from three different databases and current study. Furthermore, BIRC5 overexpression results in EMT alteration and tumor aggressive growth. Thus, targeting BIRC5 by using small molecule inhibitors like YM155 may provide a novel therapeutic approach in ovarian cancer therapy by inhibiting ovarian tumor metastasis and overcoming chemoresistance. BIRC5 expression significantly correlated with overall poor survival in patients based on analyzing data from 514 ovarian carcinomas. The results from our current study are consistent with findings from several previous studies showing that survivin is associated with poor survival and prognosis [ 31 – 34 ]. Although we showed that BIRC5 was highly expressed in high grade serous ovarian carcinoma, the role of BIRC5 expression in other types of ovarian cancer, including mucinous, clear cell, and endometrioid carcinoma was still unknown. Therefore, additional studies are required to determine the correlation of BIRC5 expression with diverse types of ovarian cancer at various disease stages in order to define its potential role in diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy.
Ovarian cancer therapy is limited due to its peritoneal spread behavior and chemoresistance. Understanding the underlying molecular mechanism will help find an effective approach by targeting at this process. In this study, we demonstrated for the first time that BIRC5 expression promoted EMT in ovarian cancer cells, which is consistent with a previous study reported in colorectal cancer [ 35 ]. However, it was also reported by another group that survivin inhibited EMT in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [ 36 ]. EMT acquisition confers aggressive cellular behavior, which contributes to tumor metastasis and chemoresistance. Therefore, BIRC5 is a promising drug target for ovarian cancer therapy because of its role in EMT and undetectable expression in normal ovarian tissues. We have tested the function of survivin in ovarian cancer cells by disrupting BIRC5 with lentiviral CRISPR/Cas9 nickase mediated gene editing and a small molecule inhibitor, YM155. Disruption of BIRC5 expression by using both approaches resulted in reduced cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and colony formation in both SKOV3 and OVCAR3 cells. However, those functional assays showed that SKOV3 cells were more invasive than OVCAR3 cells, which may also be contributed by higher expression of survivin in SKOV3 than OVCAR3 cells ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). In addition, inhibition of survivin sensitized cell responses to chemotherapy drug treatment, indicating that BIRC5 is a therapeutic target for ovarian cancer therapy. Although no studies have so far reported on survivin and tumor metastasis in orthotopic ovarian cancer animal models, several studies have shown that silencing BIRC5 expression with siRNA, shRNA, or YM155 inhibited cell proliferation and sensitized the cell response to chemotherapy [ 22 ,  37 – 40 ]. Our data indicate that BIRC5 expression is potentially associated with ovarian tumor metastasis by promoting EMT. We are in the process of testing our hypothesis: inhibiting BIRC5 expression suppresses tumor metastasis in an orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model by using selective small molecule survivin inhibitors.
Although we showed that the loss of BRIC5 expression led to an inhibition of EMT, the molecular mechanisms by which BIRC5 expression contributes to EMT is still largely unknown. It is well known that TGFβ promotes EMT in a variety of cancers, including ovarian cancer. For the first time, we found that BIRC5 expression was required for activating the TGFβ pathway and inhibiting survivin by using molecular or pharmacological approaches led to attenuating TGFβ signaling in ovarian cancer cells. Our data suggest that survivin promoted EMT by participating in the TGFβ pathway in ovarian cancer, which is consistent with a report in glioblastoma [ 41 ]. Previous studies showed that survivin is regulated by TGFβ through the ERK1/2 or PI3/AKT pathways in other cancer types including glioblastoma [ 41 ]. ERK1/2 is a positive regulator of EMT in numerous human cancers, including ovarian cancer [ 42 ,  43 ]. However, survivin is downregulated by TGFβ in prostate cancer by downregulating downstream SMAD2/3, thereby inducing cell apoptosis [ 44 ], suggesting that TGFβ-regulated survivin expression depends on cellular context. Therefore, it is possible that survivin-mediated EMT may occur through the TGFβ, ERK1/2, and PI3/AKT pathways in ovarian cancer cells. In this study, we revealed that TGFβ activated survivin expression, and that loss of survivin attenuated TGFβ pathway, suggesting a positive feedback loop or crosstalk between survivin and TGFβ pathway, although it is not clear how survivin is involved in TGFβ pathway. In a previous study, XIAP (X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein), a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of proteins (IAP) was shown to directly interact with TGFβ receptor1 (TGFβR1) through its baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domain [ 45 ]. Based on our data that showed the loss of survivin attenuated SMAD2, survivin may regulate TGFβ pathway through those components of upstream SMAD2, such as TGFβR1. Therefore, it is possible that survivin as one of member IAP family may interact with TGFβR1 through its BIR domain, thus activate TGFβ pathway in ovarian cancer cells.
In conclusion, our study demonstrated that BIRC5 is highly expressed in ovarian cancer cells and associated with a patient’s poor survival or prognosis. Disrupting BRIC5 expression by using the lentiviral CRISPR/Cas9 nickase vector or small molecule inhibitor, YM155, inhibited EMT and significantly reduced cell growth and invasion and induced cell apoptosis. Loss of BIRIC5 expression attenuated the TGFβ pathway. Therefore, BRIC5 may contribute to EMT by potentially participating in the TGFβ pathway in ovarian cancer cells.
