Transthyretin (TTR) is one of the most abundant plasma proteins and is involved in the transport of thyroxine and vitamin A [ 1 , 2 ]. In the cerebrospinal fluid, this 55 kDa homotetrameric protein synthesized in the choroid plexus is the main transporter of thyroxine (T4). Recent evidence seems to suggest a neuroprotective role of TTR in Alzheimer’s disease. However, TTR in its pathological form, amyloid transthyretin (ATTR), is responsible for a spectrum of progressive, debilitating, life-altering neurodegenerative diseases known as ATTR amyloidosis which originated from the misfolding, mis-aggregation and systemic deposition of ATTR in several organs. ATTR amyloidosis is a severe clinical disorder leading to death in many cases within seven to ten years after the onset of clinical manifestations [ 1 ]. At the moment there is no cure for the disease and effective therapeutic interventions are very limited. Thus, there is a pressing need for investigations targeted toward the identification or development of safe and effective therapeutic interventions.
Native wild-type TTR is fairly stable under physiological conditions but possesses an intrinsic propensity to dissociate into its monomeric form. This propensity is enhanced by single point mutations in the TTR gene leading to variant TTR with altered and often reduced quaternary structural stability. At the moment, there are over 130 variant forms of TTR, most of which are amyloidogenic. Systemic deposition of aggregated variant TTR as amyloid fibrils in various organs of the body constitutes the pathological hallmark of hereditary variant transthyretin (ATTRv) amyloidosis, such as the formally known familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP) and familial amyloidotic cardiomyopathy (FAC). Deposition of wild-type transthyretin leads to wild-type transthyretin (ATTRwt) amyloidosis or the erstwhile senile systemic amyloidosis. ATTRwt amyloidosis is a leading cause of death in the elderly often involving heart failure [ 3 ]. While the complete picture of the molecular mechanisms underlying the transition of normal soluble functional transthyretin into its pathological counterpart is still emerging, the prevailing hypothesis is that the initial and most important step is the dissociation of the native tetramer into monomers [ 1 ]. Thus, investigations involving the identification and development of small-molecule ligands that prevented tetramer dissociation, also known as kinetic stabilizers, were considered a viable therapeutic strategy [ 4 ]. The recent development of kinetic stabilizers, such as Tafamidis and diflunisal, in addition to TTR gene silencers, including Inotersen and Patisiran, has provided patients with some positive treatment outcomes. However, limitations involving the long-term consequences and failure to prevent neurologic impairment in patients remain major sources of concern [ 5 ]. The investigations into safe and effective alternative therapeutic agents for preventing TTR amyloidogenesis and/or disrupting the preformed fibrils (amyloid disrupters), therefore, are still required. Recently, natural products from plants have been receiving increasing attention for their anti-amyloid activities as well as alternative beneficial effects, such as antioxidants, anti-inflammatory, and metal-chelating properties [ 6 , 7 , 8 ].
  (L.) Wettst also commonly known as Brahmi, Prom-mi, or water hyssop, is a small, perennial herb commonly found in the marshy areas of Asia and many tropical and subtropical regions around the world.  B. monnieri  is a member of the family Plantaginaceae for which there are about 100 species under the same genus. Three species of the plant are common in Thailand viz.,  B. floribunda  (R. Br.) Wettst (local name: Phak sam Ian),  B. caroliniana  (Walter) B. L. Rob (local name: Lam pailin), and  B. monnieri  (L.) Wettst (local name: Prom mi).  B. monnieri  is the most common of the three due to its prevalent use in Thai traditional medicine for alleviating cognitive impairment and enhancing intelligence [ 9 ]. For thousands of years, Brahmi was widely used in Ayurveda, the Indian traditional system of medicine for treating several neurological disorders and for improving overall well-being [ 10 ]. Several pharmacological investigations have demonstrated the antioxidant [ 11 ], anti-inflammatory [ 12 ], and neuroprotective effects on disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and brain injury [ 13 ]. However, its impact on ATTR amyloidosis has yet to be investigated. Given its reportedly good safety profile [ 14 ] and abundance of bioactive metabolites [ 15 ], the objective of the present study was thus to determine the effect of  Bacopa monnieri  extract (BME) on transthyretin amyloidogenesis and fibril disruption. Knowledge from this investigation could provide insights pertaining to the therapeutic potential of BME against ATTR amyloidosis.
