The objective of this work was to determine the ability of  Bacopa monnieri  extract (BME) to modulate transthyretin amyloidogenesis and fibril disaggregation in vitro. The results obtained strongly suggest that BME inhibited the formation of human TTR aggregates and mature fibril by stabilizing and preventing the dissociation of native tetramers through binding at the thyroxine-binding sites of the protein. However, BME could not disrupt preformed TTR fibrils. These findings suggest that BME contained bioactive metabolites with potential therapeutic implications for the modulation of ATTR amyloidosis.
Normal physiological native TTR is made up of four identical monomers often annotated A-D. Each monomer is consisted of eight B-strands (A–H) and a short alpha helix, EF helix. Interaction between monomers via hydrogen bonds produces dimers. The dimers self-associate furnished by hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions to form the functional tetramer which possesses a central hydrophobic channel that contains two binding sites for thyroxine (T4) created by amino acid residues from both dimers [ 33 ]. TTR is also capable of acquiring a gain-in-toxic function by becoming amyloidogenic in human [ 34 ]. Indeed, TTR amyloidogenesis is associated with the development of severe clinical complications including peripheral neuropathy, autonomic dysfunctions, cardiomyopathy, or death in some cases, a condition which is generally referred to as ATTR amyloidosis. Unlike in several other similar multifactorial diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease where there are a lot of controversies surrounding their origin, in ATTR amyloidosis the consensus is that the key molecular event underpinning its etiopathogenesis is destabilization of the homotetrameric structure leading to its dissociation to monomers [ 1 ]. Given the pivotal role of tetramer dissociation in initiating the TTR amyloid cascade, there had been a strong momentum in research focused on the identification and development of kinetic stabilizers i.e., small-ligand agents which binds to (typically at the T4-binding sites) and prevents dissociation of tetrameric transthyretin [ 4 ]. The kinetic stabilization strategy led to the development of the regulatory approved drug Tafamidis, for the treatment of early-stage FAP [ 1 ] or cardiomyopathy of ATTRw amyloidosis. However, with limitations in Tafamidis such as its inability to prevent progression in neuropathy as well as its lack of effectiveness in late-stage TTR amyloidosis and nonV30M ATTRv amyloidosis [ 35 ], it is, therefore, vital to continue investigations aimed at identifying and developing effective and safe therapeutic alternatives.
In vitro, transthyretin is known to form amyloid fibrils under mildly acidic pH (5–4) at physiological temperature [ 36 ]. Using the well-established acid-mediated aggregation and fibril formation assay, we found that BME completely abrogated the formation of oligomers and mature amyloid fibrils by human TTR after 14 days of incubation as shown by the electron micrographs of the aged protein solutions. These findings are supported by earlier studies demonstrating the anti-amyloidogenic potential of BME on α-Synuclein [ 37 ]. Parkinson’s disease is recently being considered as a type of amyloidosis—of which the main neuropathological diagnostic feature is the accumulation of cross-β sheet-rich aggregates of α-Synuclein as Lewy bodies in the brain [ 38 ]. The crucial step in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease is the aggregation of α-Synuclein [ 39 ], which is reportedly attenuated by  B. monnieri  extract [ 37 ]. However, unlike α-Synuclein and beta-amyloid which aggregate and form fibrils via a nucleation-dependent polymerization mechanism, TTR follows a downhill polymerization of amyloid competent monomers [ 40 ]. The implication here is that formation of these amyloidogenic monomers mandates the dissociation of tetramers—the critical step in TTR amyloidogenesis. Additionally, since this process is concentration-driven, a viable strategy to prevent the TTR amyloidogenesis and fibrillation would certainly involve preserving the quaternary structural integrity of tetramers [ 41 ]. Results from this study shows that BME indeed mitigated the urea-induced dissociation of human TTR and its most pathogenic variant L55P TTR, into their constituent monomers. These results were further supported by the resistance of human TTR in the presence but not in the absence of BME against acid-mediated denaturation and fibril formation. However, BME was incapable of disrupting preformed mature human TTR amyloid fibrils. These seem to suggest that the inhibition of human TTR fibril formation by BME was due to the prevention of the rate-limiting tetramer dissociation. Previous studies in the recent past have shown that natural products such as curcumin from  Curcuma longa  (Turmeric), propolis from honeybee were able to prevent the dissociation of TTR tetramers and, thus, modulate its amyloidogenesis [ 7 , 28 ]. The prevailing molecular mechanism, especially in the case of propolis involved the binding of the small-molecule ligand at the T4-binding site within the central hydrophobic channel of TTR tetramer with consequent increase in the tetramer stability. BME binds to and displaced the fluorescent probe ANS from the T4-binding sites in native tetrameric TTR as revealed by ANS displacement assay. The binding of BME at the T4-binding sites presumably creates further interactions between the dimers which might explain the plausible increase in stability of TTR tetramer observed in the glutaraldehyde cross-linking assay. This is supported by similar observations in several previous studies, i.e., increased TTR tetramer stability by binding of small-ligands at the T4-binding sites [ 7 , 19 , 28 , 42 ], as well as by mutations which fill the T4-binding cavity [ 3 ].
BME possessed a high content of triterpenoid saponins as revealed by the RP-HPLC quantitative analysis, as well as phenolics, especially flavonoids. These findings were in accord with previous reports on the phytochemical constituents of  B. monnieri  extracts [ 15 ]. It is plausible that the tetramer stabilizing and anti-amyloidogenic effects of BME are due to the binding interactions mediated by these small-molecule ligands. In addition, BME also demonstrated a strong radical scavenging and antioxidant capacity. The radical scavenging effect of plant bioactives rich in phenolics is based on their ability to initiate single electro transfers, donate hydrogen atoms, or chelate transition metals [ 31 ]. In addition to BME binding directly and stabilizing TTR tetramers, its antioxidant bioactives might also be relevant in modulating TTR amyloidogenesis. For instance, it has been well reported that, similar to beta-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease and α-Synuclein in Parkinson’s disease, TTR amyloidogenesis is also influenced by environmental or physiological factors, such as post-translational modifications [ 41 ]. This is supported by the fact that aging is the most relevant risk factor in these pathologies, and aging-associated oxidative modifications have been shown to modulate transthyretin amyloidogenesis and disease onset [ 43 ]. The free thiol group on Cys-10 residue has been shown to be one of the most susceptible free thiols in human plasma to oxidative modifications. Given its unique location close to the surface of the tetramer and near the thyroxine binding site, oxidative modifications of Cys-10 alters the structure of the homotetramer and reduces its stability [ 44 ]. The antioxidant and radical scavenging attributes of BME might provide an indirect protection on TTR by altering the redox potential of the milieu. A similar positive impact on TTR amyloidogenesis by natural agents with potent antioxidant activities had been previously observed in carvedilol, TUDCA, curcumin, and green tea extracts, which were shown to significantly reduce deposition of amyloid TTR despite their less impressive effect on tetramer stability [ 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 ]. Previous studies have reported the neuroprotective effects of  B. monnieri  in diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease [ 49 ], Parkinson’s disease [ 37 ], and neurotoxicant-induced brain dysfunction [ 50 ]. Our investigation for the first time provides in vitro evidence for the protective role of BME in modulating transthyretin amyloidogenesis.
