LD, and especially its chronic manifestation, still poses a large therapeutic challenge. Currently, the first choice of LD treatment is based on antibiotics applied either as monotherapy or as combined therapy in conjunction with other antibiotics or adjuvant treatments with steroids, which result in both favorable and detrimental outcomes [ 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 ]. In search for other, nontoxic approaches, we evaluated  in vitro  efficacy of gallic acid against all acknowledged morphological forms of  B. burgdorferi  and its potential mechanisms of action in curbing  Borrelia -induced inflammation. Our approach was dictated by the premise of successful eradication of  B. burgdorferi , as well as decrease of inflammatory processes, which accompany this infection, as it negatively affects multiple organ systems, including the nervous system, cardiovascular system, joints, and muscles.
Polyphenols and their metabolites have been a source of natural agents with therapeutic activity and apparent health benefits in humans and animals for a long time. However, only a limited number of these natural compounds, with proven anti- Borrelia  efficacy, have been identified [ 28 , 29 , 30 ]. We have previously shown that polyphenols such as baicalein and luteolin, as well as fatty acids such as monolaurin and 10-HAD, used at concentrations 200–500 µg/mL could reduce biofilm like colonies formed by  B. burgdorferi sensu stricto  by 30–60% [ 28 ]. However, only baicalein and monolaurin applied at these concentrations were effective in reducing biofilm like colonies formed by  B. garinii  by approximately 40–60%. Our subsequent studies identified various other polyphenols as having bacteriostatic and/or bactericidal effects against spirochetes [ 30 ]. However, their biocidal efficacy against rounded forms could reach only 30–50%, and they did not demonstrate any significant antibiofilm effects. However, based on these studies we concluded that phenyl groups in these compounds are important for their comprehensive antibacterial activity. Gallic acid is classified as phenolic acid, thus in the current study we focused on this compound, which in addition to overall safety as compared to synthetic drugs, can be metabolized easily and demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects [ 21 ]. Thus, in addition to examining its direct anti- Borrelia  potential, we also tested its efficacy in curbing inflammatory response induced by live  B. burgdorferi sensu stricto.
We observed a significant, dose- and time-dependent antimicrobial effect of gallic acid against both active and persistent forms of  B. burgdorferi,  including 23% biocidal effect against biofilm like colonies. This particular effect of gallic acid is of importance as the perseverance of viable organisms in latent forms might explain treatment failure and persistent symptoms following antibiotic therapy of LD, which otherwise is usually effective against spirochetes [ 26 ]. Reported studies suggest that bacteria within the biofilm like colonies could become 1000 times more resistant to antibiotics than other forms [ 26 ]. These adherent polysaccharide-based matrices are also responsible for other chronic infections, including periodontitis, endocarditis, gastrointestinal infection, and chronic lung infection, in which some beneficial anti-inflammatory effects of gallic acid were implicated [ 21 ].
Second aspect of this study included gallic acid anti-inflammatory effects, which to our knowledge were not studied in respect to LD. Inflammation accompanying  Borrelia- triggered infection has a causal role in the pathogenesis of Lyme arthritis, as well as carditis, neurologic deficits called Lyme neuroborreliosis, and cognitive effects [ 10 ]. Its central feature is an excessive, dysregulated proinflammatory immune response during the infection phase that persists into the postinfectious period. CD14+ macrophage-mediated inflammatory responses are typically triggered by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) recognized by toll-like receptors (TLRs) [ 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 ]. Tanaka et al. showed that a natural plant extract rich with gallic acid, ellagic acid and gallate esters was protective against inflammation and oxidative stress by suppressing MAPK/NF- κ B pathway and by activating Akt/AMPK/Nrf2 pathway [ 23 ]. However, since plant extracts contain numerous active ingredients, the observed effects may be also associated with other compounds. We observed a dose- and time-dependent antibacterial effect of gallic acid against both active and persistent forms of  B. burgdorferi . While higher concentrations of gallic acid (i.e., 100–250 μg/mL) resulted in the gradually elevated levels of dead forms, its lower concentrations (i.e., up to 75 μg/mL) facilitated a significant decrease in production and secretion of cytokines and their signaling mediators.
Our study showed inhibitory effect of gallic acid on the TLR2/CD14+-NFκB signaling axis triggered by live  B. burgdorferi , which resulted in the inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines IL1β, IL6, and TNFα as relevant proinflammatory mediators in a clinical manifestation of LD [ 10 ]. It is important to note that NFκB signaling cascade triggers a variety of inflammatory factors and regulatory proteins depending on whether CD14+ is involved, thereby mediating a plethora of inflammatory processes [ 12 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 ]. Using in vitro human CD14+ macrophages, we noticed that gallic acid inhibits expression of the CD14+ adaptor protein. We also identified gallic acid as a compound constricting activation of NFκB signaling and CD14+ macrophages, which induce IL1β, IL6, and TNFα production. These findings allowed us to identify gallic acid as a compound that by acting through CD14+-dependent and CD14+-independent signaling, might lead to enhanced spirochetes clearance. Culture supernatants of CD14+ macrophages that were incubated with live  B. burgdorferi  at an MOI of 1:5 for 12 h showed significantly elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines, which were among others, inhibited in the presence of gallic acid without increased levels of apoptosis. A specific role for gallic acid in  B. burgdorferi -induced apoptosis and its potential to modulate this effect is worth exploration. It is possible, however, that these signaling pathways intertwine, mediating both inflammation and apoptosis and even phagocytic clearance of  B. burgdorferi . Our data pointing out that gallic acid used up to 50 µg/mL for 22–24 h did not negatively influence viability of CD14+ macrophages and NFκB reporter cells. Tanaka et al. also did not observed cytotoxicity of gallic acid up to 50 µg/mL on RAW 264 macrophages [ 23 ]. Interestingly, Zhao et al. reported that gallic acid has selective dose-dependent cytotoxicity for cervical cancer cells, without injuring normal cells [ 47 ]. Thus, an implication of gallic acid as an inhibitory compound is plausible, and whether equivalent concentrations can be attained with clinical use of these agents in vivo remains to be determined.
In summary, our findings demonstrate a direct efficacy of gallic acid against  B. burgdorferi  and triggered by it, inhibitory effect on the CD14+/TLR2-NFκB-controlled proinflammatory response relevant in LD. We are also presenting a potential mechanistic insight into this process by showing the inhibitory effects of gallic acid on CD14+/TLR2-NFκB signaling that drives spirochete’s induced inflammation. Our results also confirm that the CD14+ macrophages have a particularly important role in clearance of  B. burgdorferi  and the immunologic response to spirochete infection. The documented anti- Borrelia  efficacy of gallic acid provides scientific basis for its further evaluations including clinical applications as the spread of LD continues to increase on a global scale.
