Prostate cancer is the second most common type of cancer in men worldwide and its incidence is continuously increasing. Recently, a worldwide pharmaceutical company started to develop novel plant-based natural compounds for the prevention and treatment of prostate cancer [ 6 ,  31 ].
Anthocyanidins are flavonoid polyphenols that are abundant in fruits and vegetables [ 32 ]. Several published studies have demonstrated the potential of flavonoids as anti-tumor chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agents. Flavonoids have also been associated with beneficial effects in the treatment of diabetic retinopathy, atherosclerosis, and various microvascular diseases, which are attributed to their potential anti-inflammatory properties [ 32 ]. Delphinidin is an anthocyanidins with potent anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancer properties. It may aid in the development of mechanism-based cancer-prevention approaches [ 33 ].
In this study, we demonstrated the chemotherapeutic effects of delphinidin by studying its pro-apoptotic effect on human prostate cancer cells. Treatment of LNCaP cells with delphinidin reduced cell viability (Figure  1 ) by inducing apoptosis (Figure  2 ). Delphinidin treatment led to the activation of initiator caspases and effector caspases, and resulted in the cleavage of PARP-1 and HDAC3 in LNCaP cells (Figure  3 ), as well as in a significant increase in the expression of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax, PUMA, and p21 (Figure  6 ). Our results also show that the stability of p53 determines the fate of cancer cells in patients being treated with delphinidin or with a combination of delphinidin and other agents.
HDACs are transcriptional co-repressors that regulate cell cycle arrest, cell differentiation, and apoptosis in cancer cell lines [ 34 ]. Inhibition of HDACs has been shown to enhance tumorigenesis in a variety of cancer cell types [ 35 ]. Clinical trials of HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of both hematopoietic and solid tumors are currently underway [ 36 ]. HDACs have a physiological role in the maintenance of cell proliferation, cell survival, and the suppression of intestinal and epithelial cell maturation. Therefore, treatment with HDAC inhibitors induces growth arrest, maturation, and apoptosis of cancer cell lines. Among HDACs, HDAC1 and HDAC2 have been demonstrated to play a role in repressing intestinal cell maturation and promoting cell proliferation and survival [ 37 ,  38 ]. In this study, we investigated the role of HDAC3 in cell survival and apoptosis; we observed increased apoptotic rates in HDAC3 knockdown LNCaP cells treated with delphinidin. We also demonstrated that HDAC3 cleavage in delphinidin-induced apoptosis results in the p53-dependent activation of the expression of  p21  and  Bax , whereas overexpression of HDAC3 significantly reduced the delphinidin-induced activation of the  p21, Bax , and  Noxa  promoters. Conversely, knockdown of HDAC3 enhanced the activating effect of delphinidin on these promoters. Moreover, HDAC3 cleavage reduced cell growth and cell survival, and mediated the dose-dependent apoptotic effect of delphinidin.
The p53 protein is very important for the regulation of viability and genomic stability of cancer cells [ 39 ], because it activates major pro-apoptotic genes; therefore, mutations of p53 have been reported in a variety of human cancers. The ability of p53 to exert its function is efficiently regulated by specific modifications, cellular localization, and cell-cycle phase [ 40 ]. Acetylation of lysine residues in the p53 C-terminus has been shown to block its interaction with MDM2, inhibiting its ubiquitination and degradation. Therefore, acetylation of p53 is a key regulatory factor for p53 stability and activity during cancer cell apoptosis. Acetylation of p53 takes place at specific lysine residues and is carried out by acetyltransferases such as p300 and CBP. The status of acetylated p53 is known to be regulated by various HDACs [ 41 ]. Indeed, deacetylation of p53 by HDAC3 is required for repressing the hyperacetylation of p53 during the apoptosis of cancer cells. In this study, we have demonstrated that the inactivation of HDAC3 increases the levels of p53 acetylation, its stability and causes its oligomerization, leading to apoptosis. Our data suggests that delphinidin treatment leads to caspase-mediated HDAC3 cleavage, resulting in the hyperacetylation of p53.
To sum up, we investigated the apoptotic effect of delphinidin on prostate cancer cells and demonstrated that the delphinidin-induced apoptosis is achieved through the activation of p53. Caspases have been shown to be involved in the induction of apoptosis by delphinidin. Indeed, our results show that the inactivation and cleavage of HDAC3 is a result of the activation of effector caspases. We also ascertained that delphinidin-induced apoptosis could be blocked by inhibiting HDAC3 cleavage with specific caspase-3/-7 inhibitors. Our results strongly suggest that delphinidin, as well as other HDAC inhibitors, should be considered as potential agents for the treatment of human prostate cancer.
