In the present study, we characterized hybrid cells obtained by the fusion of human BC cells and human MSCs. We wanted to examine whether CSC-like cells can be formed by cell fusion and if CSCs might develop certain properties during this process. We used MSCs because these cells are located in the tumor microenvironment where they are in direct contact with cancer cells and might contribute stem-like properties, i.e., inducing EMT. The tumor microenvironment affects tumor progression and cell fusion in a crucial way, enabling different cell types to come in contact and containing molecules such as cytokines, which might function as inducers for different processes such as cell fusion [ 28 ]. Even if the cancer stem cell theory and the role of cell fusion in this context had been doubted, many previous studies have demonstrated that cancer cells are able to fuse to other cells of the tumor microenvironment, such as fibroblasts [ 29 ] or macrophages [ 15 , 16 , 19 , 30 ]. In 1998, Rachkovsky et al. described the formation of macrophage x melanoma cell hybrids with an enhanced migration capacity [ 30 ]. In 2017, Linström et al. demonstrated that macrophage:MCF7-hybrids have a higher radioresistant capacity [ 19 ], and Clawson et al. found macrophage hybrids in the blood of melanoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients [ 15 , 16 ]. Additionally, fibroblast × melanoma hybrids had been described as exhibiting a fibroblast-like phenotype [ 29 ]. These studies demonstrate that cancer cells and cells of the tumor microenvironment are able to fuse in vivo and in vitro and give rise to hybrid cells expressing stem cell properties.
We also wanted to look for CSC properties in our hybrid cells. Therefore, we used different markers that had been described before. Dontu et al. were the first to describe the formation of mammospheres by human mammary stem/progenitor cells [ 31 ]. They elucidated the formation of nonadherent 3D structures as a characteristic of stem cells. Yousefnia et al. used three different BC cell lines to generate mammospheres and described the stemness phenotype with the use of an in vivo chick embryo model. All mammospheres showed increased proliferation, migration and drug resistance potential and higher tumorigenicity compared to the corresponding cell lines [ 32 ]. In this study, mammospheres were formed by all four hybrid clones, HS578T Hyg and iMSC#3 cells, but not by MDA-MB-231 Hyg cells ( Figure 3 ). MDA-MB-231 and other common breast cancer cell lines, which do not express E-cadherin, form cell clumps in sphere-forming assays [ 33 ]. If the mammospheres also show different tumorigenic potential, this finding must be evaluated in further studies. Additionally, it must be clarified why MSCs formed fewer and smaller mammospheres, as HS578T Hyg cells did. This finding likely indicates that putative cancer stem-like cells proliferate faster than MSCs.
In addition to the formation of mammospheres, ALDH1-positive cells, and a CD44 + /CD24 −/low  phenotype are distinctive for stem-like cell lines [ 25 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 ]. In our study, we were able to demonstrate that approximately 90% of the cells per cell line expressed a CD44 + /CD24 −/low  phenotype ( Figure 4 ). Differences were found in the expression of ALDH1. The hybrids MM#2, MM#3 and MH#9 showed an increased number of these cells compared to the BC parental cells ( Figure 4 ). However, a relationship between the number of ALDH1-positive cells, CD44 + /CD24 −/low  cells and the formation of mammospheres was not detectable for the tested cell lines. Each hybrid cell line possessed individual capabilities, which seem to not have any correlation. This result confirms what was shown in our previous study, which also found no correlation between the number of ALDH1-positive cells and the formation of mammospheres using M13SV1-EGFP-Neo and different BC cell line hybrids [ 22 ]. It also must be discussed whether stem cells truly exhibit a stable phenotype or if they rather are in a state of the permanent shift [ 38 ]. This would make it more difficult to identify them, and standard methods may be revised [ 39 ].
Besides these studies, others demonstrated that the fusion of cancer cells with other cells led to hybrid cells with an increased tumorigenic and metastatic potential and an altered drug-/radioresistance capacity [ 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 ]. To test whether similar propositions can be made for our hybrid cells, we analyzed their proliferation rate, their capacity to form colonies and their behavior under cytotoxic conditions. We demonstrated that MM#2 and MH#7 had an increased proliferation rate compared to both parental cell lines ( Figure 1 ). On the other hand, the colony-forming capacity was increased for all hybrid cells compared to iMSC#3 cells ( Figure 2 ). Under low cytotoxic conditions (0.1 µM), only MH#7 and MH#9 showed a slightly increased resistance against doxorubicin. For other concentrations and paclitaxel, no resistance potential was detectable ( Figure 7 ). Whether our tested hybrid cells truly are more tumorigenic than the BC cell lines must be tested with in vivo studies.
Furthermore, it is unclear which impact epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and its reversal mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) might have on tumor progression. The transition of an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype is induced by different transcription factors such as SLUG, SNAIL, TWIST, ZEB1 and ZEB2 [ 44 , 45 , 46 ], leading to the loss of E-cadherin, which is necessary for cell–cell adhesion. Cells executing EMT are able to enter the bloodstream, where they might be able to exist as circulating tumor cells or undergo MET to enter into the tissue of a distant organ. Kröger et al. determined a so-called hybrid E/M state, which is characterized by the expression of CD44 hi /CD104 +  cells [ 27 ]. Cells in this state are highly tumorigenic. Our analyzed hybrid populations exhibited a mesenchymal phenotype in over 80% of the cells. For the MDA-MB-231 Hyg cell line, approximately 40% of the cells expressed a hybrid E/M state. More difficult is the analysis of our Western blot data. Transcription factors were expressed differently in all tested cell lines. SLUG, SNAIL, vimentin and ZEB2 are highly expressed in all cell lines, while the expression of SOX9, Twist and ZEB1 was observed to be less or only in distinct cell lines. E-cadherin was not expressed in any cell line, and N-cadherin—a mesenchymal marker—was only expressed in iMSC#3 and MM#2 cells, which is remarkable compared to the flow cytometry results ( Figure 5 ).
In summary, in this study, we tested the mesenchymal/cancer stem cell characteristics of four hybrid cell clones in various experiments. There were no obvious correlations between distinct properties; rather, all hybrid cells exhibited individual characteristics that were not predictable. Our results indicate that cell fusion leads to the formation of a heterogenic cell population with a variety of capabilities. These results confirm a plurality of studies describing the same results for cell fusion hybrid cells [ 7 , 14 , 22 , 47 , 48 ]. However, it is unclear whether the generated hybrid cells are more tumorigenic than parental cancer cells. In a recent study, Melzer et al. demonstrated that MDA-hyb3 cells generated by the fusion of MSC and MDA-MB-231 cells showed a reduced tumor formation rate compared to MDA-MB-231 cells when injected subcutaneously in both flanks of NOD/SCID mice [ 49 ]. The number of hybrid cells that is necessary in vivo to show an effect in tumor progression remains to be elucidated, which differs in comparison to tumors in which no cell fusion events took place. These effects may be a higher metastatic or proliferation rate. There are studies demonstrating that cell fusion events take place in vivo and play a role in tumor progression.
In the early 2000s, cell fusion hybrids were discovered in patients who had previously had a bone marrow transplantation (BMT) [ 50 , 51 ]. Gast et al. were able to detect fusion hybrid cells in biopsies of female pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients who previously received a sex-mismatched bone marrow transplant. They identified a Y-chromosome in epithelial cancer cells. Furthermore, they also identified fusion hybrids in the peripheral blood [ 14 ]. LaBerge et al. demonstrated that hybrid cells are also able to metastasize in vivo. Therefore, they analyzed primary melanoma cells and cells of the nodal metastasis of a patient who previously received a BMT and discovered alleles of both the patient and the BMT donor via STR-analysis [ 52 ].
Tumor heterogeneity remains one of the biggest problems cancer therapy must face. Many studies already demonstrated the diversity of fusion partners that cancer cells must create variegated tumor tissues, making it difficult to find the right treatment for all these cell subtypes. In the future, new starting points must be considered for fighting against this leading disease.
